... of roughness, which is different from pothole,
which is really driving us cops because-
Ah. Ah,
ah. ... there's now a (air conditioning system beeps) effort for you to go to, to get
the road-
Ask the, ask the question.
Oh, I will. Go ahead.
Brett.
Afternoon.
Simon.
Kia ora, nice to see you all.
Very nice to see
you.
Kia ora.
Hi,
Julian. How are you?
I'm good. I'm really good. We're nearly at
Christmas. (laughs) We will race at a, a huge
rate of knots, and then it will suddenly arrive, and suddenly adults
That's right. That's right.
Right. Always thinks you should some holiday before Christmas to keep
(air conditioning system beeps)
But we don't have it that way. Okay, look, welcome.
Um, great to have you here. Uh, a lot of familiar faces in the team.
And, um, so we've, we've got a, a structured agenda, which I
presume you've got. And, um, so we've got the...
and the introductory remarks for five minutes.
So, uh-
Five minutes, okay.
We'll, we'll give... We'll start with that, and then we'll
go onwards. I'll make that a target 'cause we've got three hours.
Yeah, that's true. (laughs)
Um, well, good afternoon, Mr. Chair and, uh, committee members.
It's, um, good to be back with you. I'm here, as you know, with,
uh, Brett Lidden, chief executive of NZTA, and, uh, Sarah and Liz
Lindsay, GGM Commercial and Corporate, and, uh, also supported by
other, uh, executive members behind me.
Um, uh, if I just speak a little about
2024/2025, um, there were,
the, it, it was the first year of the government's policy statement on Land
Transport 2024, uh, with four strategic priorities
around economic growth and develop, uh, productivity, uh, maintenance and
resilience, safety, and value for money.
It was also the first year of the 2024/2027 National Land
Transport Program, which sets a path forward for
increased funding of core maintenance work as well as new
projects. We are committed to setting clear expectations for our
role, aspirations, and priorities.
We've been working to simplify how we work, uh, which is well
reflected in our new, uh, organizational
strategy, Our Road Map. Uh, we're on track to deliver
savings across the organization by taking actions such as strengthening our
commercial capability, revising, uh,
our approach to our most significant maintenance contracts, and
making better use of technology.
We also renewed our focus on delivering the Roads of National Significance,
RONS as, uh, we all know them, and Roads of Regional Significance or
ROARS programs. In just two years, we've now completed and
released investment cases. Each of the RONS, it's different
from, uh, when we were here for you last.
Uh, and in the past, some of these investment cases would have taken between three
to five years. Uh, investment cases for the RONS programs, uh,
met their mid-2025 completion targets.
Um, we had challenges in 2024/2025,
including bringing new public transport products to market under the
ETS or the National Ticketing Solution, the sustained impact of
severe weather events challenging the resilience of both our roads and our
maintenance programs in a, in a pretty complex, I think, uh,
regulatory environment, and increasing regulatory fraud
attempts. Uh, the agency also completed many milestones and had
a number of successes, including under the economic growth and
productivity strategic priority, um, we completed
and released investment cases, as I've said, uh, on the, the
RONS and ROARS. Uh, we implemented 110 kilometer an hour
speed limits on four key corridors, Kapiti
Expressway, Northern Gateway Toll Road, Papakura
Warkworth, and Christchurch Southern Motorway.
Under the Maintenance and Resilience Strategic Priority, we commenced the
integrated devel- delivery model project, which seeks to lower the
maintenance cost per kilometer over time, and also delivered broader gains and
efficiency, accountability, and supply chain integration.
We continue to support the sector to transition to the new risk-based
approach to temporary traffic management, uh, including requirement for
all road controlling authorities to progressively apply the new approach.
And we continue to strongly... our strong performance on pothole repairs
exceeding repair targets. Under Safety, uh, our
other, our third strategic priority, we've continued to work
towards completing delivery of variable speeds limits, limits
for all state highway, um, schools before 1 July
2026, and actively work with councils to achieve integrated
solutions for schools and gates, with gates on local roads and state
highways, successfully transferred safety cameras from New Zealand
Police in which we took sole responsibility of all safety cameras
from 1 July this year. And we've continued to roll out our new Commercial Vehicle
Safety Centers with Napier CVSC just recently
opened in September. Uh, finally, under the Value for Money
Strategic Priority, we've closed down or changed the scope of programs
that were no longer a priority for the government.
We've continued to shift, our sh- our shift to improve effective and
efficient delivery. Uh, we've delivered internal efficiency
improvements and put tools in place to manage our resources
effectively. And we've reviewed and progressed recommendations to build
NZTA's capability to efficiently deliver infrastructure
projects and to support con- sector confidence.
Finally, I'd just like to acknowledge, yeah, our, our,
NZTA staff, their work, our partners, stakeholders,
improving the transport system over the past year and their contribution to
moving us forward. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
We look forward to, uh-
Thank you.
... your questions.
Thank you, and well d- thank you, and well done.
You probably kept bang on time, pretty much-
Oh,
I- ... I will say too. Right, okay. Um, what we're gonna do is we're gonna start with
the, um, with part one. So overall performance for NZTA, um,
outcomes, priorities, et cetera. So, um, Tony.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thanks to Waka Kotahi.
Um-
My first question is, there is a GPS which is now firmly
embedded. It's been in place for a wee while now.
Mm-hmm.
Yet we seem to be on track for part- particularly in the RON space for
a, a non-delivery aspect at some point in, in the future.
And the minister himself this morning accepts, uh, that not just in terms
of timeframe, but, uh, obviously cost as
well. What do you sort of see as the challenges,
apart from revenue and financing, uh-
Yeah, that's a big one.
... which is probably the biggest.
Um, you know, what other challenges are there that, uh, Waka
Kotahi are facing in their ability to deliver on that,
um, GPS?
Oh, oh, I mean, look, I think with a program of this scale,
um, memory serves me correct, I wanna say, 53 or
$56 billion
program, uh, fundamentally, you're always gonna have very significant
challenges. Uh, that's not to be negative.
Uh, uh, I think the opportunity is, is, is
great. Um, but, you know, I've, uh, listened to you, and if we put
revenue to one side for a second, I mean, another one is gearing up a
workforce, um, to deliver these. Um, we know that's very
competitive.
Brett here was, uh, in Australia in
Queensland, uh, Brisbane
earlier this year. You know, they, they are seeking, I think I'm right to say,
50,000 workers for the Olympics. Uh,
and so, you know, I've always had a view that at, at a level,
if you build it or you build the program, they will come.
But, you know, that has its limits, and it is a significant,
um, gearing up. I'll, I'll, I'll hand to Brett and Sarah for, for
any remarks they'd like to make. But if I just say, you know, I think to that
more, and I know it is the revenue part you've, you've, you know, you've said, look
apart from that, but if I just sort of say, um,
I think what has changed with the RONs, as I say, since last time we were
here, is we've now got investment cases on them
all. Um, but yet the NLTF can't
fund it all, um, and so, you know,
we've, we've given advice. Uh, we've made recommendations to the
Minister of Transport, um, around
prioritization, uh, and the revenue side
of level, um, and, and really it's now for him.
And I won't rehearse the, the things he said, but I mean, you will have
seen, um, the speech he gave in Hamilton just a little while
back, you know, where he's talked about the need for c- credible, long-term
pipeline of transport projects with a variety of funding options and a
logical sequence. Um, he's called that the, the Major
Transport Projects Pipeline. He said it includes the RONs, but
also major public transport. And he's, he's made clear there, I think, and
I don't know what he said this morning, I'm sorry, but, you know, he'll have more
to say soon. So, um, you know, funding
definitely, but there are other ones.
Um, workforce, it seems to me is a, is a big one as well. Yeah.
No, look, I'd agree. The funding obviously and workforce.
I also think on the cost side of the equation, which I'm sure we'll talk about in
regards to the, to the RONs, but it's not just, uh, the scope,
uh, of the RONs, but also cost pressures just across the board around delivering
infrastructure, whether that be PT infrastructure, maintenance and
renewals, uh, PT services. You know, there's a cost, constant cost
pressure, uh, associated with escalation- Mm-hmm. ...
and getting more productivity out of the sector so we can deliver more,
um, with a value for money lens is gonna be, it's gonna be really important as
well.
Can I just pick up on the workforce, uh, piece that you've referred
to there? Because what, what we're seeing is every week, the number of
heart folk leaving this country because of an inability to, uh, find
employment, particularly in that construction and building space-
Mm-hmm.
... because of the current government's decision to cancel a whole pile of projects
that were on the go. So, what is it that the
organization is doing to try and, um, claw back
on some of that? I mean, this is, the, the question is around being able to deliver
on the GPS, which has-
Yeah. ... as I've said, has been embedded for a while now.
So, what is it that actively-
Yep.
... your agency is doing to try and address that?
I mean, if I, if I just give you a couple of sentences and then, again, give the
hard parts to other characters.
But, I mean, I think, I think firstly, you know, you raise a
very, you know, legitimate set of points.
The reality is some of it is i- yeah, outside of
the sole responsibility or not simply the sole responsibility of
NZTA, Waka Kotahi. And as much as I'm sure you'd accept,
you know, there's an education and training piece and, and, and work
experience piece and all of those things to have, um,
you know, whether it's, it's, you know, y- young people or other,
uh, trained up and, and ready to, to, to, to go.
So I, I suppose I'm just simply saying, you know, it's, um,
success in this area won't simply be for us, albeit we've,
we've got a, we've got a role to play.
Yeah. I, look, I, I think I'd add to that-
Mm-hmm.
... and say that, um, yeah, while we've got training is absolutely gonna be
critical, it's about getting, it's about getting work to market, and we've been
trying really hard as an agency to do that.
It's, some of the problems with the construction center- sector are not just ours
because it's, you know, it's broader than just us.
But we've been working really hard to get projects moving.
I think, uh, we're spending about just shy of $200 million a month in
capital, uh, now. So we're, you know, we're starting to get back to the
levels we, we were a few years ago. It's not insignificant.
The other area we are really focused on is maintenance and renewal.
We've had a f- significant uplift in funding for maintenance.
We're changing the way we do maintenance, which is gonna mean that we're not only
gonna be contracting with the big tier one contractors, but we're
creating contestable packages for tier twos and threes in the regions so that
smaller contractors can have direct relationships with us, get the money out
faster. So, we're trying that, many ways to accelerate the
expenditure of money on our side of the equation, and also work with local
government to do the same on, on these.
I think the minister raised this morning a challenge in the capital space with
local government, but definitely in the maintenance space though, they are, they
are spending the money.
I would add-
And,
Sorry.
Yes, no, you go.
I would just add that performance NLTP period to date
is actually where we would expect it to be.
We're, we're not not performing against our targets
or our measures year to date. I think where you see the headwinds is when we look
further into the future-
Mm-hmm.
... into the forecasts.
Mm-hmm. And when you get to those, um, larger decisions around
how do you commit to large capital project decisions, um, until
the funding, um, solution is solved, that's when we've got some forecast
headwinds. Actually, performance year to date, whether it be local road,
um, uh, maintenance and operations, state highway improvements activity spend, our
own MNO spend, pothole prevention, we're actually on track.
And, and bear in mind, I mean, I'm...
I entirely agree with what Sarah said, but you know, um,
when we think of our workforce, I think 17, uh, uh,
potentially 17 roads of national significance, and this is not
linear. They're not kind of all happening at once.
It's a, it's a, it's a slow incremental process.
I mean, to date, um, and I think as Sarah
was, was saying, this is broadly to plan.
You know, we've got 2.9 billion, uh,
approved to date. Of course, in terms of actual
spend
as of, uh, well, in fact, last, last month, November, that's,
that's more like 427, 430 million dollars, right?
So, so
it, it, it's a gearing up, I suppose, is all I'm saying.
Sequencing, I think the minister-
Sequencing.
... said this morning.
Yeah.
So-
(laughs)
Okay. Right. Um, I had a sup here on (1:30:00) . You've got a sup as well?
Uh-huh, primary.
Primary. Okay. No, we'll take the sup here first.
Hey, good afternoon, uh, everybody.
Thank
Um, just on the, the, um, maintenance.
So the National Infrastructure Plan came out earlier this year, the draft plan from
the Infrastructure Commission-
Yeah.
... and they raised that we don't really do maintenance well.
Um, just wondering how those sort of recommendations are feeding
into the...
Mm-hmm. ... uh, way NZTA is going about looking at him-
Yeah. ... you know, maintenance of infrastructure rather than just going
off and building.
Yeah. And look, we've talked about, a lot about maintenance at this committee over
the years.
Mm-hmm.
I've been here many times talking about maintenance.
Andy's a good reminder of it. He's always (1:30:35) (laughing)
(laughs)
Well, I, I, I was (1:30:37)
It's not as glamorous, is it, Daniel?
(laughs)
I, I think one of the challenges we've had, and we've talked a lot about it, was we
were... we had some constrained funding in, in the years gone by, which has
ha- had, had proved to be challenging, which meant that the asset deteriorated.
In recent years, over a number of the last few years, we've had an uplift in
funding, which has been significant, which has helped us, um, be able to
be much smarter investors around how we're investing into maintenance.
One of the keys is having strong asset management capability and having a
strong asset management plan. We've always had an asset management plan.
Some agencies haven't, but we have, and we're constantly updating that across the
asset classes. But the one thing that we are doing is that we are changing
our o- our, our, um, procurement model, our contracting
model for maintenance and ops. We'd used a network outcomes-based contract for the
last 10 or 12 years. It's come to the end of its life.
We're now changing that to a new type of model.
One of the big changes in that model is that we are bringing back in-house, uh,
quite a bit of the asset management, which we'd previously outsourced.
So, we're gonna be doing that closer to, to us, so that we have greater
control on that. And then also, we are being much more...
um, going to be much more about direct procurement.
So, we're going to be much clearer about, uh, what we pay for
and directing the contractor to do that.
So, if we want that pothole fixed, we'll pay you to pick, fix that pothole, rather
than a performance of a corridor over time-
Mm-hmm.
... and we pay a performance, uh, number.
Uh, so we're going to be a lot more directive.
And then, like I said, we've got contestable packages within that.
Right.
So, we're doing a huge amount, uh, in, in fact, probably the biggest
change since 2008 or '09 when we brought
in the NOCs.
Right.
It's, it's pretty significant.
Awesome. Thank you.
We were going to cover asset management to the next, uh, but, but given that you've
asked, asked that, I'll do one quick question, then I'll take, go to Julie-
Mm-hmm.
... and, and that's just in terms of, you said, you said NZTA had always had a,
good asset management plan.
Mm-hmm.
So presumably, given that the, um, asset was essentially declining
in its quality because there wasn't enough money-
Mm-hmm.
... your asset management plan was telling you exactly that.
Yes, exactly. Yeah.
It's all well and good having a good asset management plan, but if you can't, uh,
if you don't have enough money to invest in the base amount to keep the
asset-
Yeah. ... at a suitable and appropriate level, then you're always falling behind.
So yeah, our asset management plan was definitely telling us that.
Yeah.
Uh, which is why we campaigned pretty hard to get an increase in, in funding in
that asset space. And I'll, you know, I acknowledge, um, you know, this committee.
Over, over a number of years, we've had a consistent increase over the last two or
three GPSs to, to, to address that.
Mm-hmm.
So, you-
Oh, go on.
Oh, you were going to say something?
No, I was just gonna-
Okay,
I'm just, so, so I thought you were looking purposefully at that sheet-
I am. I'm just seeing
how much- ...
and going, "Oh, yes." Well, that's what I thought you were doing,
... we spend in state highway operations-
(laughs)
... (laughs) um, which is, which is, is against an activity class target
of $2.3 billion. As at the end of October, we've, um, we've spent
$1.185 billion in that activity class for state highways, which
And, and that's to go through to Ju- to June next year.
So you're, you're cracking well.
Yeah.
Um, so just on... So just to finish that, the AMP bit, from
my perspective on that particular bit.
Um, previously, I think you told us you were running at about 50% of,
um, what it sh- in other words, spending 50% on renewals and maintenance-
... of what it should have been. Uh-
Yeah.
Now where are we at, like to maintain the asset?
Because-
Uh, I don't know the percentage off the top of my head.
We can come back-
Okay.
... to you on that-
Okay. ... Chair, but, uh-
No, it's cool.
I haven't got that, that number right in front of me.
Okay, that's fine.
But it is significant. It's definitely significantly more.
It's much, much
I think if you look in our annual report, you'll see that there's a number of
activity, a- asset classes.
Mm-hmm.
We have, we have focused mainly at the moment in pavements.
So, we are, um, over-investing in pavements to get the quality of the
pavement asset back up. Um, that has been a sore point for New Zealanders
for some time. This is the pothole story.
Um, but yeah, we, we are well aware there's other asset classes, end of
life bridges, that we are going to have to look at investing more in- into the
future. So, it's a, it's a gradual thing.
Uh, we knew when we started this journey that to, to lift the quality of the asset,
it was never going to be a one or two year journey.
It's going to be a 10-year journey across all the asset classes.
Yeah, cool. Okay, Juliette.
How important is transparency to the organization
and compliance with the Official Information
Act?
It's very important.
And, um, do you feel that the organization
is fully complying with the OA and, and sharing as much information
with the public as they could be?
I mean, I... (sighs) I was gonna say the transparent answer.
The transparent answer is, I mean, I haven't today or this week, you know,
looked closely at the numbers, but certainly when I've looked in the past
in terms of our, um, responses to written
questions, OIAs and so on, um,
my recollection is we perform above the norm in the public
sector. Um, and you know, where there's
areas we haven't been
perfect or we could learn, we, we want to do that.
Uh, but you know, I think fundamentally, I come back to what we said, it's very
important. Uh, we take it seriously and, uh, if you've got
examples where we haven't, you know, we want to know about that.
Has the ombudsman investigated any complaints in the financial year in the review
of NZTA?
Mm-mm.
Just confirming, we have had a small number of ombudsman complaints.
We always obviously look into that.
I'm happy to provide the committee with details, but we are...
There was recent benchmarking put out from the Public Service Commission of all
Crown entities and all public service departments, and we were found one of the
highest complying agencies, both-
Yeah, sorry. Can I, can I get you to come up to these?
Or-
Oh, yeah.
The microphone please? Sorry, I couldn't even see who was-
Yes. ... who was speaking there. Uh, and also if you can identify yourself too, that'd
be helpful. Yeah, so-
So, uh, Karen Jones, Group General Manager-
That's Karen.
... Engagement and Partnerships.
Uh, just confirming, uh, an answer to your question.
The Public Service Commission does regular benchmarking on public service
agencies and Crown entities. Uh, that information is publicly released.
We're one of the highest complying agencies in terms of compliance with
OAAs, uh, timeliness and also a small number of
referrals to the ombudsman as a percentage of... We're a very, have a very...
Thousands of thousands of requests we manage a year.
Mm-hmm.
In fact, we're often asked to provide case studies for other agencies in the way we
manage information.
How many investigations did the ombudsman conclude?
I don't have that at the top of my head, because that wasn't one of the questions
we prepared for, but I can certainly find it and get back to the
commission.
But you can confirm the om- ombudsman has done some investigations and made
recommendations?
And that is complete, 'cause from-
And found NZTA to be at fault?
Uh, of course.
Highly, partially?
A small number, yes. But again, in the context of many, many thousands of
requests.
And I, I think... And I, I'm not downplaying it, but I think-
Mm-hmm.
... you know, my recollection is, I mean, we're literally at the top
in terms of the OIA requests-
Mm.
... in the public sector. I mean, it's, it's-
Definitely.
There's not, there's not many, if any, possibly Health NZ,
uh, that gets as many as we do.
Yeah. So Police, Health NZ, we're, again, one of the highest
complying.
Um, a lot has been used to withhold
information about the cost and benefits of projects.
And we've heard from the Infrastructure Commission that this is not good
public policy, that there's no reason for public money being spent
on infrastructure projects to not, um...
for the organization to not be open about how much they expect those projects to
cost and what they expect the benefits to be.
So I'm just trying to reconcile, I guess, um, even if
the PSC is saying that you're good (laughs) and the Infrastructure
Commission, and clearly over the past 10 years there's been far more
secrecy around ex- very, very high cost projects, around their
cost and their benefits.
Yeah. I don't think that we're... You know, that's a deliberate, um,
attempt to try and hide costs. We want to be as transparent as possible and we've
just recently released a lot of information and we've got more to come on the, on
the RONS. I think sometimes we do get caught in timing and we've been caught in the
past where sometimes our cost estimates are still in development or
not as advanced as, um, as people may think they are,
and then they get taken as locked in cost estimates and then we get held against,
uh, held against us for then having incorrect cost estimates down the track or
incor- incorrect BCRs. So, it is getting that balance
right. Uh, we've done quite a bit of work in recent times about updating the
way we want to release cost information, uh, publicly, uh, so
that we're, uh, much clearer earlier on in the phase about the
uncertainty of those numbers and then we get more certain as the phases go through.
So, we're well aware that, um, people are interested in costs.
It's, it's making sure we're giving the costs at the right time and with the right
certainty attached to it.
Would it be better to ask specific questions about the investment case in the next,
uh, investment cases and
If it's any particular r- um-
Yeah.
... project, then yes, it would work.
I guess overall the investment cases that have been released, um, are highly
redacted.
Yeah.
And some of the information in some of them doesn't match the information in the
consultation documents. So I'll ask about that with specific projects, but,
um, any-
Yeah, sure. I, look-
... view on whether...
Yeah, all I'll say to that is that some of it is redacted, I agree.
Uh, we're also going through, at the moment, um, a further release of
more detailed information on all those investment cases which will be coming out in
the next few months. Um, the reason why sometimes things get redacted is
mainly around sensitivity for two reasons.
One, property sensitivity for landowners.
And the second is around if we, if we're, we're concerned from a commercial
perspective in regards to future procurement.
Our supply chain read these things as well so we don't want to compromise our
ability to get good prices when we eventually go to market.
But, um, look, if there's particular examples, we can either talk about it or come
back with more information.
We've got a specific improvement initiative underway at the moment to address,
um, audit feedback. That's expanding the
reporting that, that we make, um, publicly available specifically to
increase the comprehensive information on project costs, time, scope and
benefits.
Can I go to that point as well? And Simon, you've got a question, did he...
I was just gonna say-
No, no. Well-
... just wondering
We want a moment.
... part two? Because I'm just holding on till we do.
We can...
We are on, we are on part-
Yeah, we should
just move- We're on part one.
Yes.
So, we'll deal with part one first.
But we... Yeah, we're coming to time.
We do the time, so we'll deal with part one first.
Okay.
This is much more organized than in my day, I can tell you that.
Oh, look, we try and keep it-
That was a free-for-all of shit.
(laughing)
Well, you know, we've learned from watching past behavior.
(laughs)
So, look, the question I've got is just in terms of, um, this conversation we've
had before, which is in terms of saying we've, we've got various projects.
Um, at the early stage, you obviously don't know the scale, the scope, the geotech,
all those sort of things. So, um, being able to put a specific number, but usually
get for getting the number wrong at some later stage when inevitably it
will be wrong. That, that is true? Yeah.
Yeah. But it can be positive or negative, of course, right?
I mean, and, and, you know,
over time, you know, my memory serves me correct, you know,
one of the sort of bits of advice to us at a level is that,
um, uh, y- y- you know, we, we could
fall into the trap of, you know, politicians want
something now, they want to get it out the door, they want to announce it.
And, and, and of course that's then, you know, you've locked in a price and
BCR and so on. And in the end, whether that's good or bad, it's not, not
accurate. And, uh-
I agree.
... so there, there's just... There is...
That's a phenomenon I think we could all u- un- understand.
I'm not suggesting that's a, at any level, a full excuse to-
It's more, it's more the case of saying, "We like that project, we want to
investigate that project." "What's it going to cost?" "Don't know yet.
We'll tell you, we'll tell you in a year's time." Yeah, or give, or give greater
ranges, which is where we're heading, which is recognizing people want to know
cost, but be a bit, a bit greater in the range because of those factors.
I want to go back to that issue of overall funding.
So you told us, um, Simon, in, in the
introduction, you said RONS was 53 to 56 billion project.
I think that was roughly the order of magnitude you were talking about.
Yes.
Of the overall collection. Um, when you look across-
56 billion.
56.
Okay. When you, when you look across, um, the, uh, all the
maintenance requirements, all the, all the demands on the NLTF, uh,
crowdfunding, et cetera, have we got a picture yet?
Um, or is that something which is going to come out next year?
I think we understood from the minister about what that picture looks like, so
people have got a really, a realistic view of how long it's going to take to roll
some of these, uh, pro... To sequence some of these
projects. Okay.
Yeah, basically the short answer is yes.
That's what the minister indicated this morning.
We know that the 56 billion is not fundable in the, in
the short to medium term, and it is going to be sequenced, um, as the member said.
Over time, we're talking to the minister and giving him advice, um, and, and
information around that. I'm sure that will tie up with his work on GPS
2027 that MOT have been working on as well.
Okay, cool. Thank you. Secondly, just in terms of that, that idea of a
pipeline, the organization particularly tasked with looking at pipelines as
the now National Infrastructure, uh, the Infrastructure Commission and the National
Infrastructure Plan. One of the things they told us, if I think I understood it
properly, was that NZTA hadn't really sort of said, "Well, look, this
is our... This is how we fit into that, um, plan in terms of
here is the rollout of investment in
transport projects," which of course would be a fairly big hole if it wasn't part
of the National Infrastructure Plan in terms of some degree of, um, some degree of
certainty.
Yeah, two things, I think. Um, slight misinformation there.
We have put all of our projects into their pipeline.
Okay.
That is in their pipeline. I think you're now referring to the IPP assessment
framework, which hasn't got our projects in.
Just on, um, pipeline, one thing we are doing with the RONS, uh, it is
about pipeline and the key of around pipeline is getting ahead of the curve, which
we haven't been so good of in recent years, which is getting designations down
and, um, and, um, progressing, uh, projects to
a point that they are construction-ready.
So, when there is funding available that you can move on them.
So, with regard to the RONS, we are continuing to work on
them, uh, to, um, progress through, uh, fast-track
consenting to either get designations, designations and consent, and
some property purchase depending on, uh, how, how much further
work is to happen on a particular project.
Okay, no, that's helpful because that also deals with the question I was going to
ask about consenting and the value of fast track, etc.
Giving you, giving you that faster.
And also, I asked the question this morning about designations.
Yeah, we're very supportive of the idea of having some funding
available, which is mainly what the funding that the chair was referring to, to
invest in designations for the RONS, even if the construction
is, is a number of years away.
Okay, cool. And then the other question I had in the funding
space, um, one of the other two, two or three other questions
actually, um, the, the issue of other revenue sources and
particularly value capture, which I've raised with you before, it's just what
progress is being made between presumably between you and MOT about
value capture again we had the Infrastructure Commission saying to us on whatever
day it was, Monday I think, um, that, uh, growth only
at the moment is only paying for about 30 to 50% of the cost of growth.
Therefore, 50 to 70% is not being paid for by growth, it's being paid for by
existing road users, taxpayers, etc.
Um, one part of that would be able to capture from the likes of NZTA.
Um, how are you progressing that kind of work to think about the value
uplift that are gained, the development potential that's gained through NZTA
projects and NZTA will say, "Hey, we'd like to get, we'd like to get some of that
to actually fund the roads that are enabling that as, as local
government." Yeah.
Yeah. Um, so last September, I think it was, um, under
secretary court, um, requested some information around this as well and so it
sparked a couple of case studies, um, on the potential use of value
capture, um, for Northwest Rapid Transport and Tauriko network
connections, the State Highway 209A improvement projects.
Um, this estimated value capture could be possible at approximately
5 to 10% of capital costs.
Hmm.
Um, so, so we've had a look at that. We're also looking at what are the tools
available to us now. Um, and so obviously,
the, um, the tools that we have now are,
IFF, um, as an option. So, we've been looking at, um, working
with our partners in, um, National Infrastructure Funding and Financing
Co. to understand, um, how and when we might be,
um, able to use the lever of IFF as a tool.
Um-We've also done a, um, a research,
produced some research on the change in residential property values, um, from
previous transport investments.
So, looking specifically around the greater Wellington region, bit
of a proof of concept work. So, um, still a work in process, but
we found that the average sort of treatment effect, um, to be,
there was a 1% uplift in- in values in the Kapiti region
with the expressway, um, before Transmission
Gully, 5% uplift in Kapiti with Transmission
Gully, um, completed, and 2% uplift in Porirua with
Transmission Gully completed. So, it's a bit of a work in progress, it's a- it's a
bit of a proof of concept, but that's the type of work we've started looking at.
What's available to us coming up in the pipeline and what's some of the benefit
that we've delivered through previous projects.
Yeah. Tha- that- that- that's really good.
W- were those, just to be clear, were those situations where it was, um,
residential value going up on-
Yeah.
... on residential value as opposed to enabling rural, um,
areas to be, uh, rezoned and uplifted?
So, it's a bit of both and it's the, it's the, it's the net uplift that you
can, uh, potentially-
Oh,
so it's a com- ... apportion to the-
... combination?
That's right.
Yeah.
To the, um-
Okay.
... transport, um, investments.
Yeah.
Not overall uplift.
Okay. So, it's, so, so it's use- it's useful?
Yeah.
Yeah. Cool.
Simon?
Yeah. Thank you. I'm just interested in unpacking that a little bit
further-
Yeah.
... because you mentioned the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act, uh,
as a way to- to essentially, um, levy
for cost recovery in some aspects of, say, a transport
project. We know it's been used in Wellington for the Mile Point sludge treatment
facility. It's been used in Tauranga for essentially a- a- a
district region-wide transport program.
Mm-hmm.
Um, do you think it's more appropriate to use that kind of tool for something that,
um, benefits a whole region or something where you can better
attribute the value uplift and potential cost recovery around a
node? For example, if you build a new motorway interchange-
Yeah.
... and it enables development of commercial or industrial around there, is that
a, is- is that a more of a direct link for value capture or
cost recovery than all of a sudden the whole region's paying for something that not
everybody necessarily uses?
I mean, I think there's an opportunity for both.
Um, and it would depend on the project and the benefits that are being delivered.
It is really important that you're able to attribute, be- attribute benefits if
you're gonna be charging a levy for that.
And those benefits might be system-wide benefits or broader benefits, or they might
be s- really specific benefits depending on- on the project.
Mm-hmm.
It is a complex transaction and a costly (laughs) transaction
to- to go through. So you, there is a- a
tendency to be pulled towards, you know, larger-
Yes.
... regional-wide, um, transactions that cover multiple benefits.
Mm-hmm.
You can see that through ease of use.
Um, but I'd say there's absolutely opportunity for use in both cases.
But the beneficiary's got to be able to see the benefit.
That's the key.
Yeah.
If it gets too obscure for them, then it's a much harder thing to justify.
Yeah, certainly. Thank you.
Okay, other questions in the, um, financial, uh,
finance et cetera area, overall system? Okay, so I've got Tracey, then- then Tangi.
I'll go.
Tangi first,
yeah. Thank you. Um, can I just ask, uh, from your perspective,
what steps do you think are being taken to prioritize, uh, public transport
and active modes of- of transport in light of the GPS
now being embedded for 18 months or thereabouts?
Well, (whistles) (cheers) (laughs) these guys can
fill in the gaps. So I- I think, you know, firstly, I mean, let's be clear,
the- the- the GPS takes a different view from the last one
and it's government's pr- prerogative.
And so there is, you know, less of an emphasis in that, uh,
necessarily in that- in that area, in those areas because, you
know, there- there's a much stronger emphasis on the ROMs and,
uh, a view around, um, you know, the productivity and growth.
That is true. I mean, that said, um, I think what we've seen
from this minister is, um,
nevertheless a definite emphasis, um, and strong progress
on, uh, p- p- progressing on projects like
North West Busway or transit. Uh, you
know, the continued works on Eastern Busway, uh,
and, you know, significant funding there.
Um, uh, Botany,
um, and- and other projects besides.
So, you know, I do think
it- it is still strongly there even with the change in
emphasis, but I don't know if there's other...
Yeah, well, I- I- I guess ultimately the- the first layer of prioritization is
done by the activity class set in the GPS, which is in us, that's MOT and the
minister. So, you know, we give our governing by the range we're given.
Within that range, we're absolutely trying to, um, squeeze as much out of it as we
possibly can progressing, like the chair said.
Nor- in the PT space, we're focused on finishing the Eastern Busway with Auckland
Transport, investing heavily in that.
Uh, we're focused on the national ticketing system, which is a very significant
project, which is starting to see some green- green, good green shoots and
good results now. And we're focused on the North Western, uh,
Busway, um, as well among other, among other things.
Same in the walking and cycling, although as you know, the walking and cycling
activity class is tighter, um, s- and Ngāranga to Pitaoni, which is
probably the biggest project is now coming to the end of it, which took a- a big,
a reasonably large portion of that funding.
The board has increased the activity class investment target by just under a
billion dollars since we adopted the NLTP to include,
um, additional i- um, um, investment in North West Rapid, um,
Transit, North West Busway, um, and Auckland level crossing
approvals.
Yeah. So that's... I forgot about the Auckland level crossings.
So on North West Busway, we are now building the first station out at Westgate,
which is fantastic. It was, that was Crown money through NZTA.
We've got funding for the designation and we're about to lodge the
designation and consents. We have got funding to build a second station,
which is at Brigham Creek. Uh, it will be delivered as a stage project, but it's
now starting to build momentum.
Okay, uh, Tracey?
Thank you. Um, just with respect to, um, road
safety outcomes, obviously you monitor the New Zealand police
funding for their, um-
... programs and, um, one of those, uh, key
performance measures being the, um, passive breath
tests conducted, um, and the data
integrity-
Yup.
... issue with that, which I understand is under investigation.
But what does... How, how was that-
Okay.
... impacted you in terms of your, um,
your response to that in terms of your monitoring, um,
obligations and how you've handled that or?
Do you want me to answer it or should Richard?
Well...
Should it be Richard, is it? No, you can go for it.
Oh. Look, I mean, I d- no, I think, I think we'll go straight to, um,
Forgan on that.
Uh, good afternoon. Richard Forgan, Group General Manager of System Leadership.
Um, so in, so in terms of the monitoring, our, uh, police
identified this irregularity with breath screen testing.
Um, they have shared data files with us, and we are working through those,
doing the replicating and checking the analysis that has been done.
We're working through that with police at the moment.
Um, uh, as a consequence of that, we've paused the, uh, until that
issue is resolved, the, uh, monitoring and allocation of deliver-
delivery-dependent funding-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, which is a quarterly payment of $6 million.
Uh, if targets are met, uh, as and when we are able to say with
confidence between both organizations that we know what the number is, uh, we will
resume those processes.
Just to add to... For context, though, the target was 3.3 million breath
tests.
Mm-hmm. Uh, the police, before we started this investigation had
delivered 4 million. Obviously, some of that's in question now.
But, um, so we, you know, it's well over the target, but we haven't,
uh, made the payment on the KPI until we complete this investigation.
Yeah. 'Cause obviously underlying all of that, the, the issue still remains.
Correct.
The, the fundamental issue on the road plays out.
So, um, it's a tricky situation-
Yeah.
... in terms of your support.
And, and it's a really... You know, we see it as an incredibly important tool in
road safety.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Uh, breath testing is only one of many, but, um, restraint, uh, management,
speeding, speed, speed fines and the like.
So yeah, they're all important tools.
And adding the drug, um, element-
Correct.
... into that is... That's
(inaudible)
The trial will launch, uh, this month.
Mm-hmm.
And then we're looking at national...
I mean, subject to the learnings, national roll-out next year.
Yeah.
Okay. Uh, Gillian.
Gillian?
Yeah, yeah, sorry. I was jumping ahead on my questions.
I, I would-
Let's not do that.
No, no, no, no. I do want to... I have one for that side just-
Keep in the, in the, in what we're-
Yeah.
... in that one.
I guess...
Y-
Yes, still on section one for, like, five more minutes.
You want
If no one has any more-
So I have a question-
I do.
Okay.
Yes.
... about the G... Uh, well, it was a question on one of the comments that was
just made about the NLTP
investment-
Target?
... target being moved for the public transport-
Mm-hmm.
... activity class.
Have any other targets changed for any other activity classes?
Uh, y- yes. Um, State Highway
Operations, um, has, um... Well, we're
hoping it will be formally, um, increased once we
have had the nod from MOT because we've included,
um, North Island with the event funding, um, and that activity class has
increased the, the target.
So, have there been any reductions in other activity
classes?
Um, the...
No, but we did have the, um, TAG contingency convert
to an actual grant post-
Okay.
... the adoption. So, we had additional fund to, uh, funding to allocate.
So, we didn't need to do that balancing act.
How much of what's currently in the NLTP-
Mm-hmm.
... is, like, debt or a loan from the
Crown?
Um, so current debt... I know you're going to have that number before I
do. Um-
That's okay.
... in this current NLTP, the
number, the amount that we're looking is...
Do you want to know what our total debt levels would be or what the, what the
repayments are?
So the total, the total loans and debt against the NLTF is
three point... If I'm reading this right, zero...
$3.3 billion?
Um-
Excluding the PPPs.
Yep. It's, that's plus 1.9.
So, that's excluding the-
PPP-
PPP repayments.
That's 1.9. Sorry. It's, um... Yeah, it's more than that, including the
PPPs. But our total debt repayments over this GP...
over this NLTP period is $1.9 billion.
Okay. So you're borrowing more
in this NLTP than you're paying back?
Yes.
Yeah, yeah. And we haven't debt... We've drowned...
We've drawn down on all of that debt yet.
Yeah. So that's the debt, total debt available to us.
It's not what we've drawn down.
Yeah. So... Oh, I see. Yeah.
So, we have facilities made available for, to us-
Yes.
... to fund this current-
To manage.
Yeah.
Correct.
I understand that.
Mm-hmm.
But it's getting to be, like, quite-
Yeah.
... substantial.
Correct.
And it's just then that means you're gonna have to be paying more back-
... in the future.
Correct.
Plus you've got more spending plans in the future.
Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, we would always advocate for more revenue (laughs) than,
debt, um, as our starting position.
But at the moment, so to give a sense, our, our sort of debt-to-revenue ratio
is, is still only sitting at about 88% of annual NLTF
inflows. So that's still a very prudent amount for us to be having as
an agency.
And what's... I mean, the total State Highway network
is valued at $80 billion? Is that right?
Uh, it got updated. 90-something. Mm-hmm.
89.
I'm not really sure. (laughs)
Is it?
We've been deep in the State High- Highway valuation numbers.
I'm, I'm, I'm-
It's just under $90 billion.
On those, on those specific numbers, I think...
'cause we had a useful, um, useful question response here in terms of the-
Yeah. Excuse me.
... expected revenue streams.
Yeah.
It would be quite good to have that with a...
We'll, we'll put that in the follow-up questions in terms of, okay, can you just
tell us what, what you've drawn down totally so far-
Yup.
... the debt you've got and also what the project...
And how much of that, that future revenue stream is already effectively,
um-
... uh,
how we've been committed-
Yeah, so-
... uh, into-
And to what-
... pay- paying back PPPs and the like.
So, the, I can give you the picture on the, on, on debt.
So, NLTP loan from '24/'27, which is the one that
we're currently drawing down on. We've only drawn down 460 million-
Sorry about that.
I think it's about to bring access up to three billion.
460.
From the previous NLTP?
In this period.
Yeah.
And we've got access to three billion.
In the last NLTP period, '21/'24, we drew down the full two
billion.
Yeah.
We haven't touched our shop facilities. That's the management of the cashflow.
We have COVID, uh, 19 borrowing facility of
325 million.
Yeah.
We have an original Auckland Transport package loan.
She might remember that, back in the day.
That's, uh, 236 million Housing Infrastructure
Fund loan of 144 million, Tauranga Eastern Link of
106 million, and some borrowing in regulatory as well.
We will, we, these will be captured into the, um-
Less the two PPPs.
But these will be captured, won't they, those numbers?
We can provide those numbers.
Yeah, that will be good. So, it gives, it gives us a complete picture. Okay.
Julie-Anne, are you finished?
Yes.
Okay. Look, I've got one more question, 'cause I did have one on PPP, since that's
done. And that's just, uh, in terms of the Crown funding, wasn't
quite clear, so at, at the moment the Crown's putting extra money in.
It was not quite clear whether that is, uh, money which is for specific
projects, or essentially some of it is compensating for not having raised
Fetton RUG over the next three years.
It's a mixture of both.
Yeah, mixture of both.
So, um, the
major Crown infrastructure projects, PVC and ZIT, um, ask for,
funding us for specific projects.
Yep.
Um, and the, um, Crown grant
is, uh, revenue balancing team.
Okay, so it's both.
Uh, sorry, and the s- so the TAG, the one billion TAG contingency, which
became a grant, did have specific, um,
uses-
Yeah.
... tagged to it.
And those uses were Malling Interchange-
Yep.
... 294 million,
Waikeria Gorge-
Yep.
... on State Highway 2 north of Napier, 141 million, second Ambur-
Ashburton Bridge at 95 million, Brougham Street at 132
million, which is the work we're doing to-
So, those are all Crown, Crown grant funded?
This is the TAG contingency-
Yes.
... that's turned into a grant, and Auckland level crossing removal of 200
million, and the remainder for RONZ at 216 million.
Okay.
Makes up the 1.78 million-
Again, again, we'll get that pictured, um-
Yep.
... and, and a bit of a-
Yeah.
... written up. Okay. That's brilliant. Okay, cool.
I think we are done, and we're bang on time with, um, that first, uh, segment.
So, we're now on number two, which is State Highway, uh,
Network. Who's going to kick us off? Right. Tangi.
Put me-
Yeah. Tangi got in first there.
Yep. That's all right.
(laughs)
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yes.
Now, pothole patrol.
Yeah.
Isn't that just a complete failure,
hey? I'm not asking you, Simon. I'm asking them-
(laughs)
...
No, I don't, I don't think so at all.
I mean, I think, you know, if anything, I mean, in terms of,
um, you know, respectfully the, the targets that, that have been set
and so on, it's, uh, you know, achieving
strong results and, you know, ensuring better roads
for Kiwis, um, to drive on. Um,
very happy for, uh, either the gentleman next to me to
run you through some of the detail on that.
But I think, you know-
Oh, I, I- ... I don't think we'd accept that.
Yeah, sifted great.
Well, I would, but I, I'd actually like to follow that up with,
uh, preface that with a question.
When we look at the number of potholes that have
been remediated-
Yeah.
... are you comfortable with the number of return visits to the
same site,
not just once, not just twice, not just three times, in many
circumstances four times or more, to
remediate or fill the same
pothole?
Gentlemen, you want to go?
Um, well, I'll start, and then maybe you can say-
Yep.
Good afternoon, everyone. My name's Kevin Doherty.
I'm the Group General Manager of Transport Services.
Um, and clearly, you know, four times return, um, to the same pothole is not
a fantastic result. But at the same time,
um, you'd mesh this in, um, with the, you
know, additional renewal work that we're doing to, to
enhance the, the overall asset performance.
So, um, unfortunately with potholes,
um, you know, they do tend to reoccur, because the
underlying, um, granular pavement tends to
have some, some issues. Um, so ultimately,
to fix the asset so that you don't have to return and fix the potholes so often
is to increase your, um, your overarching renewal program, which is what
we've done. And in the first 12 months, um, uh,
we've, we've overperformed in, um, network
renewals, uh, to try and mitigate that going
forward. Mr. Chair- So-
I'll let, I'll let Tangi, yes, I've got, I've got two of you for sups on this, but
I'll let Tangi finish his first.
Thank, thank you. So, when you say, you know, sort of third and fourth and the like
are, are not that great, if I sort of say to you that
figures from the, the period that we're reviewing in, around
June, 4,731 potholes were
remediated, 1,997 of that
number had to go and have a second, uh, sort of
chunk, uh, 1,108 a third, and
then some.
Yep. So, what is it that you're doing to ensure that, you know,
this, this is a resource that's not basically going out three, four, five times?
'Cause I agree, it's not that flash. It's not that great.
Yep.
But, it wouldn't be if, if the case was much lower.
But we're talking of, for example, of nearly 5,000 potholes, over
a thousand of them have had at least three visits.
Yeah. So, I'll make, I'll make a couple of comments.
The first is that, um, now that, that's in the context of over 50,000 potholes
repaired annually. So, that, that's the first point.
But secondly, you're right, we don't want to send them out repairing potholes more
than, more than once. The reality is, though, that we're very focused
on repairing potholes quickly where they occur, which often means
we're going out when it continues to rain.
And we know that once you, uh, when you go to repair a pothole and you trap
water-... under the repair, it will blow out-
(coughs)
... and that would be what's happening in those scenarios, I'm sure, if we dive
down into the detail and they'll have to return.
The alternate would be to leave the pothole there, in an unsafe...
a safe condition, which we also don't want to do.
So, it's no, uh, no easy answer. It comes back to the point that Kevin makes
is that ultimately we want to get to the point where we don't have...
we don't have potholes, so we want to make sure we're improving the overall
asset quality so the number of potholes we have to repair reduces overall
and we're heading in that direction.
But you are right, I agree, it's absolutely not ideal-
(coughs)
... when we're repeatedly repairing potholes, I suspect, in
pretty tough conditions. But that's no excuse.
Okay, thanks.
Okay, I've got two subs. One, two.
Thank you, um, can you just give me...
us an overview of how that Pothole, um, Prevention Fund
is being used? I mean, you, you mentioned 50,000-
Yep.
So, you're saying the NZTA, in the last financial year
has done 50,000 pothole remediations?
Yeah. So actually (laughs) the Pothole Prevention Fund, it's a bit of a, a, an
unhelpful name at times because it's not about fixing the potholes.
No, it's not.
It's about remediating the asset.
And so we've got, um... Yeah, it's quite a large number.
Last year we spent $740 million on
reseals and renewals. So reseals is just surfacing over, so
waterproofing the surface, renewals is digging the road up and replacing it when
it's come to the end of its life. We've got another 700 million we're spending
this year. I've talked about this before at this committee, that the ideal asset
management target is that you are resealing about 8% of your network in a
year and you're renewing an order of 2%.
We're building back to, to that. So, uh, in, in this
year we're gonna be renewing 1.4% and
resurfacing the 8%. So we're slowly getting back up to a renewal
cycle, which is, um, what you would expect to maintain the asset
at a good quality condition.
The repair of potholes is actually only a smaller proportion of that
funding.
Understood. Do we... Does the, um, agency do a
stock take of potholes across the country, or is it...
is it just-
Yeah, we record them.
Every pothole that's... uh, that is identified and then fixed, or fixed
multiple times is recorded.
(laughs)
So we know where they are and how many. That's why I also said... So back in...
As an example back, in 2022/'23, which is probably when we, we were at
one of the worst times, we had 62,000 potholes that year, um, I
think now, uh, running this year, we're at about 50... 50,000 potholes.
So we are slowly seeing a reduction.
But the improvement in the quality of the asset was...
um, it was, was always gonna be a, a longer period than just a couple of
years and we know that, and, you know, the modeling we did suggests us that it will
take, uh, you know, up to 10 years to get the entire asset back to the
condition-
Right.
... that we want it to be.
Good stuff. Thank you.
Simon?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, I think it's been fantastic, just before we go on this
Chair, to hear this, um, technical explanation about road maintenance,
um, pavement subgrade. I really appreciate that
and I'm sure the other members of the committee will also benefit from this, um,
highways 101-
Simon, you were the one who wanted to leave early.
Well-
Speak for yourself.
(laughs)
Everybody's speaking at
I have a question about the bridge assets.
Yep.
I understand that a lot of the assets on the State highway network, and also on
local roads for which NZTA contributes to funding, are from the
'60s and '70s. They were built by the Ministry of Works,
um, and they may well be, in many cases, nearing the end of their useful life
and need replacement. Um, would you be able to share with the committee
how many bridges might be
of that age, you know, roughly? And then what the program might look
like to, uh, replace or renew... extend the life of these
assets?
Yeah. Kevin might have the exact numbers.
I don't have the exact numbers, but you're right. We have a, a...
Not, not too dissimilar to actually many developed countries around the world that
built a lot of their assets in the '50s and '60s-
Mm-hmm.
... we have a growing, um, bow wave of end of life
bridge assets, and so does local government.
That's gonna require significant investment.
In this NLTP period, we've got about $120 million
allocated for end of life bridge replacements, about 10...
10 to 12 bridges, but, uh, that is gonna have to increase in, in time
significantly. We are looking at, uh, how we can, um,
flatten the bow wave of that, which is, uh, doing repairs to
existing bridges to extend life, strengthening it using carbon fiber and other
things to, to get more life out of those bridges and flatten it.
But in the coming years, we are gonna be definitely investing more
and more into replacement of end of life bridges, and so is local government as
well.
Don't know if you've got the actual numbers in front of you
for that one. I don't have the actual total number. Um, uh, you...
The TO is quite right. There is, um,
uh... ten that are, um, being replaced at the moment.
We've got a, uh, clearly a, a bow wave coming towards us.
So, one of the things we've been doing is, uh, to look at, you know,
opportunities to, you know, standardize and really make efficient that
delivery process going forward. So there's quite a bit of work being done in, uh,
sort of modern methods of construction and standardization to, to, to build
into, um, uh, that program going forward.
But, um, we will require... We'll require the funding for that. Oh, sorry.
Would you mind just speaking up a little bit?
Sorry, I was just saying, um,
there, there's, there's ten that are being replaced at the moment, but, um-
There's- ... there is another... Oh, I haven't got the number, unfortunately.
I'll have to bring that back to the committee for the, the reminder that we'll
need. But there is definitely a bow wave that's coming towards us- Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
... and acknowledging that bow wave, we're doing quite a bit of work on modern
methods of construction to look at standardized approaches so that we can-
Okay.
... really efficiently deliver those when the time comes.
That's, that's really good. Um, Mr.
Chair, with, with your, um, indulgence, but that's,
uh... Um, I'm really interested in whether
NZTA is continuing with the wooden bridge
initiative-
Mm-hmm.
... that was proposed under the previous government, which I understand was,
uh, all about building things out of wood.
In fact, if you look, um, just a little distance from here, you'll see an entire
building going up, a six-story building going up out of wood.
Um, is that something that NZTA is still committed to?
It's not a, it's not a, a, a number one priority for us.
So, the priority at the moment is what Kevin just referred to, which we're looking
at much more around standardization, mainly concrete, concrete bridges.
We do have a small bit of work continuing on, uh, how
we can develop, um, uh, timber bridges, but they would
be, um, more in the context of, um, lower
volume, um, or, or, or different mode type
bridges, rather than our main big state highway bridges.
Our real focus at the moment is one or two bridge types,
completely standard, that we can roll out across the country.
But timber's not completely off, uh, off the table if it has the
right time and place, but it's not our number one priority.
Thank you.
Two quick questions from me and then I'll go to Julieanne.
Um, first one, uh, of, um... presumably, uh, given the comments you made about the
pothole fund-
Yeah.
... it would be quite useful to ask the minister, could he change the name of it,
um, so that it actually reflects what it actually is, as opposed to, um, as opposed
to that. Um, second question-
People wouldn't think-
The sec- sorry? The second question (laughs) , second question is,
um, you said ideally up, reseal 8%, re- renewing 2%.
So, going back to what you said before about the overall, uh, asset management of
the, of the system as a whole, what did it get down to when it was a- at, at its
worst? 'Cause it gives us a picture.
You said 50% roughly of what should have been spent.
So, I'm assuming it got down about 4%, 1%, or something like that.
Uh, actually, what it, what we ended up doing is that, uh, we tried to keep the
reseal, um, up, so I think we were stayed, maintained that at about 7
to 8%.
Yeah.
'Cause that was simply waterproofing.
The best way to protect a pavement is put water over, even if the underlying layers
are failing. Um, but the renewal piece got down to about 0.3 or
0.4%-
Yeah.
... and that was what's hit us. That's the, that's the issue we're trying now to
address-
So-
... is that y- we were resealing over-pavements that were at the end of their life,
trying to extend them. We are now in the, in the process
of renewing those pavements, and that, and that's what happened last summer, which,
um, you know, it was a real success story for us, where we, we went
and replaced large sections of State Highway 1 between
Cambridge and Waiouru, um, and we've renewed
those, those highways with new, new roads.
We did, um, I can't remember the k- n- the number of lane kilometers, but a
significant number of lane kilometers on that particular corridor 'cause it was in
that exact situation.
Okay. But that, that... 'cause effectively what that means is, if you carri-
carried on at that rate of, um, of renewals, you'd have been taking about, you'd
have expected 300-odd plus years out of the-
That's right. That's right.
... the, the, yeah.
And, you know, a pavement clearly-
... a pavement's gonna last anywhere from 10 to 20-
Yeah.
... to, to 20 years. But the reality is that, you know, on the flip side of that is
that you have to cut your cloth to the funding available and you've gotta-
Understand. Understand, yep. ... make the right trade-off, the trade-offs.
Yep. No, we understand that. Okay, Julieanne?
Um, so I have a series of specific state highway
project-focused questions.
Cool.
And I'm just wondering how we wanna do that.
Could I-
Uh, as quick,
as- ... just, it would make sense to ask on specific projects?
Quick, quickly as, as possible, as part of
Okay?
Yeah. Okay. Um-
So other people can get a crack too.
Okay. So firstly, I'll talk about something that was already under contract, which
is, um, State Highway 16 Brigham Creek.
Uh, my understanding is that contract had already gone
out before the new GPS, but that the project was changed to
remove median barriers.
Yep.
Can you tell us, um, what the advice was on that
and why it was changed? Why would the new GPS apply to something
that was already under contract?
Uh, it wasn't so much about the, the new GPS. It was changed.
At the moment now the project is, um, is widening and wide
center line, um, and intersection improvements.
It has gone up in cost, so some of it was about taking cost out of the
project as well. So, it wasn't just that.
But, um, as you know, we've had quite a lot of challenges, including at this
committee, around the use of wire rope on our network, where we've got-
Mm-hmm.
... another location where we have put wire rope in and, um, and there's a
strong community support to take that wire rope out.
So, it's not an easy, um, area to
navigate.
Right. Fully agree. Next, next one, Julieanne?
Um, Transmission Gully.
Yeah.
Sorry, I have to ask this question-
That's fine.
... because I've asked in multiple (laughs) forums and I still don't quite
understand.
Mm-hmm. Sure.
Um, there was two, um, repayments-
Correct.
... that were made as like COVID settlement payments.
Yep. Yeah.
Were those made, like, already made or are they included in the
repayments?
No. So, I, I've heard you ask these questions, so I can give you all the facts if
that would be helpful.
Eight-hun- the project was, uh, 850 million-
Yes.
... which is the borrowed component of the PPP.
Right.
We had two settlements, three settlements through the life of
the, uh, of the PPP. The first was 190 million, which was
a cash payment to the-
That was a cash payment?
... to the SPV and onto the builder.
Okay.
The second settlement was 210 million, which was also a cash payment-
... onto the builder and wasn't added on to the debt, meaning that the total cost
was 1.25 billion, of which 850 million was making up the
funded-
Was borrowed.
There was a third, which I can't disclose the final because it's commercially
sensitive, which was the final settlement when we've changed the arrangements of
the PPP, which was a payment back to us.
And can I ask, so the... you've said there's an average
113 million-
Yeah.
... annual payment over-
Yep.
... 25 years?
So, um, is that like number... do we know for sure what
that's gonna be 20 years from now or is that gonna
change? No, 'cause it changes based on, uh, interest and other factors.
But what happened is that the project, as you know, um, is no longer really
structured like a pure PPP.
Yeah.
So, we reached a settlement with the, the, the builder that, um, for
them to, uh, walk away and for us to take the road back and a
payment was made to us, which I can't disclose the value of.
The, the, the value of that payment was for us to complete the road 'cause there
was still issues with it being uncompleted, and we can talk about the maintenance
happening up there now which relates to that.
It was also for us to complete the consent conditions that were
outstanding. Including in that, that meant that the SPV, which is the, the,
the mechanism that, that was, uh-...
that we were contracting with is now, is now only, uh,
carrying the debt so we're repaying the debt through the SPV and the equity.
Um, the KPI performance regime is gone and the maintenance obligations
are gone and they were adjusted in the settlement as well.
And, um, what's your estimate on the annual
maintenance costs?
Uh, I think the allowance was about five to six million that was taken into
But it's significantly more than that this year?
Uh, yeah, it's significantly more than that this year because we're actually doing
more than maintenance. We are, we are repairing work and finishing
work that the builder didn't do which we knew when we took the bro- the road
back. What happened is that the road,
um, when we were doing, through, going through COVID, we, we did
change the pavement design because a lot of this is related to pavement, and we
changed a third of it to deep lift asphalt which is the asphalt section, the smooth
sections. That was on the steep grades.
We left the rest, uh, under the original regime which is a more traditional
chip seal pavement. When you do a chip seal pavement, you put a chip seal down and
then you come back, yeah, 18 months later and put a second coat down.
That never happened because we were in dispute with the builder.
So what we're out there doing now is one, is we're putting the second chip seal
coat down to seal it but also we're putting further drainage
in to remediate the damage that's been done while that second
coat hasn't been there. Once we do that over the next, uh, summer,
over the summer, we believe we can get the pavement back to a steady state
and then we'll maintain it normally after that.
Um,
(sighs) so
if we... I mean, I've tried to understand.
It's difficult for us to understand what the full cost of the
project is over the life
based on the fact that we don't know what the repayments will be in the
future. We don't know what the settlement was, how much
NZTA got from the consortium by taking over-
Yeah. Well, in a sense you can take it that, that the cost of the project in real
terms is $1.25 billion. $850 million of that is borrowed of which we're
paying back over the life. So if you think of it like your house, you pay
$300,000 for your house, you're gonna pay back $800,000
because you pay a whole lot of interest.
And that number you don't know yet either because interest rates will change and
things will change over the life of that.
But in essence, the road has cost, cost us $1.25 billion
but since the borrowing-
Plus interest. Yeah.
Plus interest, but the-
Plus interest.
... we just talked about all the borrowing that sits in the NLTF as well.
May I-
But when the Crown borrows directly, it has a lower cost
of capital than when it makes payments-
Yeah. ... to a private consortium and that was justified on the basis that they would
be taking on the risk of the project.
Mm-hmm.
But in a way they haven't because the government's had to take over the
project. So we're still, I mean, presumably
it's all kind of secret and maybe you can say, "We got a good deal." But we
don't know. Like, the public can't know that we got a good deal because you can't
tell us.
Well, in the en- in the end we... I mean, respectfully we do.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, I think firstly it's important to record that, you know,
on the PPPs to date, uh, this one in
Northland, you know, it wasn't perfect.
We want to learn and improve from the experience, uh, in a future
PPP or PPPs. But, you know, we, we, we can certainly
say, uh, I think with
very high confidence, um, this was very
good value
to the Crown.
But you would say that.
And, well, maybe I would but I-
(laughs)
... I'm gonna put it, but I want it to be recorded because it's an important
point. If we take, um, 02NL,
um,
a, a, a, a much less complex, uh,
project, um, and kind of, you know, at, at a level try, and I'm
pretty sure we can't perfectly compare apples with
apples, it's the same or more. Um, so I mean,
it, it, it, at $1.25 billion
circa, it's, it's very good value to the Crown and therefore New
Zealanders.
Um, but if we take 113, say that's the average-
Julie Anne, can I just make a suggestion?
Um,
there are a lot of other roads in the country.
There are, yeah.
So I'm just suggesting that we don't have too many more on TG.
Yeah, definitely. And just, if you take $113 million,
um, and you multiply that by 25 years, you get $2.825
billion, and then you add $400 million in the cash payments and you get
$3.225. And then there's, you know, the maintenance
and rebuilding and other costs. But also you can't tell
us what the settlement
Well, we're bound by-
So,
yeah. ... we're bound by non-disclosure agreements (crosstalk) .
So I, I guess I just make the point that you're looking at
doing PPPs for other extremely expensive high-cost
projects. Um, I think it is,
there are two, two points. One is you've had to take over this one, so
like the whole idea that somehow it would be designed in a way that would be more
innovative, that would reduce maintenance costs, totally irrelevant because you're
taking over the maintenance and rebuild of the project.
P- p- p- ............................
Yeah, it, it does rather-
Yeah.
... but perhaps you could, in terms of an answer, just tell us what you see the
advantages or disadvantages of, of PPPs for future projects
being?
Well, I th- I think, uh, y- you know, um, uh, Julian Gent
who's got a lot of experience i- in this area has identified them.
You know, we do think, um, fundamentally they bring, um,
innovation to bear, um, and they give you a lifetime, you
know,
cost and, and allocation over the, uh, the project amongst
others. I, I think, you know, whilst we can take his point
around interest costs and these various things, in the end any
project will have a borrowing cost.
Uh, and, and so, you know, I don't...
if that's true however you procure it, whether it's, you know,
strictly speaking under a traditional model or it's a PPP.
I don't know if you had anything about the, the benefits that are
there?
Um, o- on, on PPPs in general?
Well, you know, the, the member's right.
Y- you know, the, the, the model is designed to set an affordability threshold
that, uh, drives the private sector to pro- bring innovation and to
operate it in an innovative way which is how we're establishing, uh,
the next PPP. TG has got a whole lot of history and lessons learned
which we won't go into today which has meant that that hasn't played out quite
like that in this situation and we've had to take the road back.
We talk small, but if other people want to go and come back from-
I'm going to move on to somebody else.
Yeah,
yeah. I might have to come back on there. But Simon, you've got a quick sup on this
particular issue? Can you-
Uh, no, I'd quite like to move on to a primary, uh, 12.2.
Okay, well in, in that, in that, in that case, that's fine.
Yeah.
Go for the primary, then we've got another primary here.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, look, uh, this morning we had Minister,
uh, Bishop, uh, come to the committee, and I asked him a question around
how we get better value for money and potentially can deliver
more of these RONZ projects by looking at how scope might
be adapted, uh, so that maybe we can get more kilometers
delivered, um, within the available budget.
So, uh, I asked him about the Australian, uh,
motorway, uh, motorway network, which rises two
lane, three lane, four lane, and kind of ranges between 80 and 110-
Mm-hmm.
... kilometers an hour. So, I'm, I'm wondering, in looking at the RONZ
projects, thinking about sequencing and,
uh, when, when we could actually see some of those roads
delivered, are you looking, um, seriously and
deeply at scope? For example, look at the Brynderwyn
section. I'm, I mean do we really need to drive over the Brynderwyns at 110
kilometers an hour or could, could we accept 80 kilometers an hour
but actually you've got four lanes instead of a two-lane goat track?
Yeah.
Is that the kind of thing you're really seriously looking at?
I, f- firstly, I will hand it, either of these gentlemen
to, to f- fill it out again. But I, I think, I just want
to assure you, and I can recall, I can't remember, um, if you were here
that time, but the last time we came we, we had this, uh,
discussion as well. And I, I think if I can say the
committee was, um, u- uh, gratified to s- see the sense that w-
which, you know, we do wrestle with these things, but if you look at our
priorities, um, uh, economic growth and
productivity-
Mm.
... um, RONZ explicitly part of the GPS, but so was value for money.
And, uh, and so whilst there are
specifications, um, for roads of national
significance at level, you know, four lane, et cetera, et
cetera, um, y- you know, you're already seeing, I think, from what
we're putting out there, um, 110 kilometers, um,
that, that is, they are not invariable must meet standards
because scope and cost and value are very
important.
Mm.
And so, um, y- y- you know, um, I, I
hope I'm not saying anything we haven't announced on you, but you know, if we take,
for example, Hawke's Bay Expressway, it will
not all even
f- f- fully be at 110 kilometers because, you know, we do need to achieve
110 kilometers because we do need to achieve value, um, uh,
for money and, and right size and scope-
(clears throat)
... each particular project. And we, and the board I think, you know, with the help
of, uh,
uh, management really wrestles with that in every case.
Yep.
Mm.
Yeah, look, I, I think, um, I can add to that and just maybe take it up
one level and we can get on to standards.
Uh, ju- just in general around, um, project delivery and what we're thinking about
around value for money. There's sort of five aspects I would say that'll drive
cost into projects. The first is property, which is a massive component, and
the work we're doing to be able to purchase strategic property ahead of
projects is a real advantage, because you get the land at a much cheaper rate and
you can... and land bank that. The next is standards.
Uh, and you're correct, we, we're very closely aligned with Australia.
We are part of Austroads, who set guidance and standards
and we look over the ditch regularly.
We have reset our standards off the back of the RONZ.
We have, uh, reduced the footprint.
We're reducing shoulder, our shoulder requirements on the RONZ.
We're reducing the reaction time, um, so that means that, that you can have
steeper grades and tighter curves at different sign speeds, and we're
looking at standardization, like we just talked about, bridges, pavements and other
things, to get more uniformity in how we deliver.
You then, um, you then have the scope of projects themselves, and I can touch on
that in a second. The other two areas I would say that you want to drive
efficiency, which we're also looking at, is consents.
Consents add huge cost to our projects, especially mitigations, and you're well
aware of that. And then finally, and the last piece, which is the, the, one
area that we do want to focus on going forward, is productivity.
How do we get more productivity out of the construction sector as they're building
these projects? When it, when it comes to the RONZ themselves and the standards,
we haven't adopted the four-lane grade-separated 110
requirement. We have moved away from that on a number of, of the
projects. Um, you know, if I, you can take for example,
well the Wellington one's a good example, but, um, I won't use that one.
But there's other examples where, east-west in, in Auckland, it's
going to be a 60 kilometer road. It's actually using some of the existing
asset, um, it's going to have some grade-separated, some not
grade-separated. Mill Road is the same, it's only going to be a s- 50 and
80, 60 kilometer mix of road. Uh, it will use
grade, at-grade intersections. Hope Bypass, we're sta- looking at
staging that and not doing the grade separation, upgrading the intersection to get
10 more years out of it. So I can keep going through.
There's a number where we've really challenged the scope and the staging
of the scope to get the best out of it.
Excellent. That's really heartening. Thank you.
Good. And look, just to, to follow that one up, then I'll go to Dan is, so the,
because one of the things you tried to do that with, um, O2NL, but it was late in
the piece and obviously that fell foul of the community in that way.
But you're going to make sure that as you go forward, the scope of them is clear at
the beginning, right?
Although even that one,
even that one, Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, I forget the details, was...
but it was de-scoped.
Yeah. Yeah. O2NL-
But you'd probably like to de-scope it further, but that's challenging.
We did, we tried, we tried to de-scope.
You know, there's a lot, there's a lot tied up in there.
Being a bit honest, isn't it? (laughs)
(laughs)
But yeah.
We're always very honest.
We, we, well, we take consultation seriously, so...
Yes.
Yeah.
And trying to, trying to value engineer late in the piece is a lot harder than
getting the scope right
from the start. I, and that, and that was the po- that was the point that I'm hoping that in future
you, you, you got it as you expect to do it at the beginning,
not...
O2 and L also comes to the, you know, the point we were talking before about
transparency and- and- and decision-making.
And you know, the community there had expectations built very early about what
they were going to get. The cost of that went up and it was very hard to wind that
back. So, it's
Yeah. And jokes aside, I mean, you know, actually, th-
others disagree, I think that was a very good process.
Yeah.
'Cause in the end, as you say, we went out there, um, we
did significantly de-scope it. Um, some of that ended up going back
in because very strong, clear-
That's
okay. ... community sentiment. But not all of it, and that was probably a good
compromise, uh, position.
Uh, just to-
Hang on, whoa, whoa. I'm gonna go a sub over here. Share it around.
Oh, I'm not going to sub, but I'm gonna, I'm gonna go with the point and get it in
anyhow. Um, all this talk about Rollins makes me, uh, wistful for the South
Island. Of course, we feel very, um- um, underdone-
(laughs)
... when we, uh, when we think about that.
And severe weather conditions, um, obviously affected State
Highway 1 and key freight, um, routes in 2004,
2005, area that we're talking about.
What sort of actions are you looking at?
'Cause um, you know, roads off national significance aren't just, you
know, monuments to future use. They are, um, ensuring the
resilience of what we've already got.
Mm-hmm.
Talk me through any of those South Island alpine coastal
kind of considerations.
Talk about resilience program, do you want to talk about that?
Um-
Uh-
But if you're coming at this from a resil- it's not really Ron's, um, direct
question, it's a resilience question.
And um, uh, with- with resilience, um,
on the State Highway network, we've developed, um-
(coughs)
... we've dev-
Sorry.
We've developed, um, uh, a tool to map all of the vulnerabilities in
the, in the State Highway network, so we know where they are.
Um, and it's really, um, you know, a matter of assessing
all of the different vulnerabilities, um, and then looking at the different
investment costs, um, to- to mitigate those.
So-
Is it running full?
... you know, as we go forward and we look at, um, funding, um decisions
of-
Can
I have some of that? ... funding environments. Um, you know, we prioritize the various vulnerabilities,
um, and we be- we can group those up and we can invest in those to, uh, to
mitigate those going forward. So, it's a bit of a change from how we've done it in
the past, because in the past we
Yeah.
... had the tools to be able to assess them, to look at them.
It was done more on a, on an ad hoc, um, response and
recovery. Now, we're looking at getting in front of the game, um, and
mitigating some of those vulnerabilities before they-
Mm-hmm.
... they turn into-
Just regional to the-
Yep. And that's nationwide. So it's really looking at, each one, looking at, you
know, the- the criticality of it to, you know, connectivity, to
economy, to all of those different criteria.
And coming forward with in- you know, investment packages to say, "Well, this is
how we could, we could deal with that." So, it's- it's a little bit of a change of
tact to how we've historically done it because we have the tools now.
Um, and we can also start to use, uh, say, AI and other algorithms to
help us, um, you know, best focus in on the right areas to
invest in.
And I- and I- and I do think that- that the other part of your question was still
a legitimate question, is I think there possibly was a- a sentiment out there, well,
where was the South Island in all of this in the early stages of obviously
very significant Northland corridor, uh, for example.
But, you know, we're making substantive, significant progress
on Hope bypass, Belfast to Pegasus and Woodend
bypass, um, Brougham Street, uh, a Canterbury package
around Rolleston, Second Ashburton Bridge, uh, Canterbury
package. Um, uh, you know,
rural, um, the Queenstown package.
Uh, so- so I... It's not for me to play the politics or
not, but I would just say there is a substantive list of, um,
both roads of national significance and roads of regional significance there
in the South Island.
But also, also some trade-offs there, like Brougham Street. Yeah.
You mentioned Brougham Street, but you know, we had funded that in the previous
government-
Sure, sure.
Um, and then, you know, public transport funding was then reallocated to- to-
to re-instigate it up that list.
So, we don't... Yeah. I appreciate the list, but it
doesn't feel like that and I wanted to acknowledge that.
Yeah. I'm gonna take... We've got just under 10 minutes for this section.
Noting, noting that... Yeah, okay.
Noting that, um, we are not going to finish early, unless who wanted to.
Um, Simon, very quickly.
Yeah.
Yeah, Simon, very quickly and it's up.
Yeah. Um-
And then I've got one here, and then I've got one there, I've got one there, and I
might miss out.
Just on the, um, Kapiti Coast Expressway next
session, uh, next section, uh, Otaki
to Levin. Uh, we heard before about the
agency's ambition to use post-recovery value
capture type mechanisms through the IFF Act-
Thank you.
Um, given that the community is going to benefit
from these fantastic grade-separated interchanges, do you think
that that community that benefits should pay the
difference? Because why should taxpayers in Southland and
Auckland pay for a grade-separated interchange when the traffic volumes
there are barely a fraction of what would actually justify it?
Hey, let's get an answer.
I, yeah, I-
Go with Carl.
(laughs) Oh, I don't know.
It's like ecowage.
I don't know that we-
I don't know we have a strong answer on that one.
I mean, that's- that's- that sounds like-
So, I'll let you off the
shelf. That sounds like something you should have put to Minister Bishop.
(laughs)
Heading north to Auckland, um,
uh, NZTA budgeted
6.2 million for the Waitemata Harbor connections,
uh, drilling and barge.
Wow.
Just keen to get an update on how that went. I saw it and for several months.
Well, you've just helped us on our bingo session because we had a bingo from you
that that would, something along those lines being asked.
(laughs)
Um, I mean, I think
your high level, um, then um, Brett
or Kevin can take you through the process we're following in-
in detail. I mean, it's a very important project.
Um,
you know, it's a- it's a- it's a, um-It's a nation-building project
that, i- it will be, you know, it will be, in, in, in
cost terms, you know, very significant, um, probably the most significant
ever. I know the ministers resisted, and rightly so, I'm sure,
putting numbers on that, and we don't know, but that's the
case. Um, and, and the reason it's important, though, of course, is
resilience. Um, I think probably first and
foremost, actually. It's not to be dramatic about, you know,
the, the Auckland Harbour Bridge, but it's, um, but it is aging,
and, you know, we will see less able to happen on it over
time. Uh, and then, of course, capacity.
Um, and, uh, you know, um,
all jokes aside, I'm not saying this to pander to you, but, you know, North Shore
that's got very significant growth.
Um, it's
reaching well over 200,000, uh, in, in the
next few, few years. In terms of the process-
(coughs)
... I might give you a broad sketch, but I think there'll be Brett or Kevin take
you through that.
Yeah. Yeah, look, I think, um, it's been a, a really important process
because, um, we needed to move the, the project forward.
Um, so what we've been doing, um, is a, is, is a few things.
First is that we, we've taken forward two options, a bridge option,
best performing bridge option, and a, and a tunnel option, and we're developing
those up so we can do a proper, um, apple-for-apple
comparison so that decision-makers can see the trade-offs of each
of the options, benefits, the costs, and make a decision around
how they want to invest across the corridor.
One, a part of that which has been critical is actually getting out and testing the
ground and understanding the conditions.
We actually have got to drill under the harbor to see, uh, not only for the tunnel,
but also for the bridge, and what sort of conditions we're dealing with.
And then that has allowed us to do a, a, a greater level of, um,
design. I wouldn't say this is design, but it's more than just a line on a
piece of paper now. We've actually put quite a bit of thought into staging,
constructability, and the likes.
We also went out and tested, uh, did some market sounding.
It was really high level, high touch, which was, you know, we wanna build a harbor
crossing and, you know, is this even gonna be possible?
And what would you be, as an in- w- what would the industry be thinking about?
What would they like to see? At what point would they like to engage in it more?
And we got some feedback on that. We'll collate all of that together, and into
next year we'll take that through our board and then on to ministers
for, for some decisions.
Okay, thanks.
When, when's that likely to be in terms of, um, a board, a
board consideration,
um-
The board will be, uh, first quarter next year.
Um, and then we'll see where we're at from that.
They may require some further work.
We'll just, you know, go to that first.
Okay, thank you.
Yes.
And sorry, um, will, will, will that include like the
BCRs for both options, or-
Yep.
Okay. And costs.
Yeah.
And, and, and it'll include the, the, the key trade-offs
and differences. Both, both of the options that we're looking at, you know,
will both achieve the objectives of capacity and resilience, um,
deloading the, the bridge to some extent, um, that
the, was talked about before. Um, but what you'll
see, um, or wh- when that decision process goes through is, you
know, can that be built? How can it be built? What are the constraints?
What are the key differences between the two options, uh, to really make that,
that, that, um, really important-
And, and the, and the board, and just very briefly, the board's taking very active
interest. The majority of the board has, um, been over
the, um, harbor bridge, um, you know,
on foot,
checking out, you know, the, the, the physical ac- aspects of
this. Um, and, you know, had a number of sessions
on it.
Great.
Before I just go over there, just in terms of what you h- you answered before in
terms of growth-related, uh, funding, uh, you mentioned growth in that
area, um, is a fairly obvious place to start looking, 'cause given the scale of
the, the project of growth, of the growth levy on new development in
that, um, area as a possibility to help fund it.
Yeah, sorry, I should have said that. That's the other piece we're doing in this.
Oh, excellent. Well done.
We are, we are looking at the, uh-
Well
done. ... at a potential, uh, funding stack and how that-
Excellent. ... what the options of that might look like.
Good. Tangi.
Yeah, thank you. Um, thank you for your answer-
Last one.
... to question 58-
Last
one. ... in the, um, the questions that were circulated.
That's the table with the breakdown of funding, um, allocation, how much has been
spent for, um-
(clears throat) ... each of the ROMs. Um, Simon, you talked about lots of progress
with the Hope Bypass. I mean, according to this, of the
81.7 million that's been committed, only 2.3
million-
Mm-hmm.
... has been spent. Um, now likewise, there are lots
of other examples. If you look at the Takitimu North Link stage
two, 223 million has been committed,
27 million has been spent. Um,
there are lots there. Now,
what I'd like is a bit more level of specificity for-
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
... each of those, and now isn't the time.
I wonder if we could do that as a, a post meeting sort of stuff.
Might be, might well be, yeah.
We can give you a bit of a sense that-
We, we can give you more information, but I think, you know, just very high level,
I mean, I think pretty new information in as much as it might have
been the last, or certainly not, re- recent board meeting.
I mean, the, the board has, um,
you, you know, has approved, um, 72, uh, 72.7
million, uh, in funding and pre-implementation.
So those numbers-
Okay.
... that you're talking about are, are tracking up.
That's fine. I mean, this is as of October, so I appreciate that there may have
been some change.
Yeah.
But it would be helpful to get not just updated numbers for the committee, but
what that actually looks like. So what percentage of the property
acquisition has been completed-
Oh, sure.
... or not. I'll leave that here.
Yep.
Um, but I have a question about Te Utanganui, uh, in the lower North
Island, the f- the freight hub opportunity.
We asked Kiwi Rail about this earlier in the week.
That is something that has been identified in the Infrastructure Commission's,
uh, draft infrastructure plan as, uh, a particular project.
It's regionally been identified as well.
It's the multi-modal sort of coming together-
Mm-hmm.
... of freight opportunities, um, in the-
In the hub
sense. ... in the Manawatu as a hub.
That makes sense, yes.
Um, what is, what is the
sort of progress and update...
... on that aspect.
(laughs) Well, I, um... Well, you, you, you deserve more than
a chop of fish for catching our short first time on something.
Um-
I was going to say,
Charles- I, I, I gave the question.
Um- (laughs) yeah, no.
We can talk, Charles.
No, that wasn't on the bingo list.
(laughs)
Um, I mean, all I can... See, see, see what I can tell you is...
And I- I'm, I'm broadly aware of the
project.
Yeah.
Um, and not that it's, you know, that the board fundamentally,
you know, come up from, from NZTA,
um, you know, have some sympathy. I think, um, it's been one that's
been around for some time. As we sit here right now,
um, I, I don't think we can give you a substantive update.
Um, but again, let us come back to you with more information on that.
Okay. Okay. Um, we have gone slightly beyond where we were going to break for this
one, Julie. And I'll take it to quarter past, and then we'll break.
Okay.
Then we'll break. Then we'll break for five minutes.
Thank you. Um, had a series of questions on the State
Highway 1 Wellington improvements.
Um,
uh, firstly, the investment case that's been put online
lists a slightly different VCR than what's in the other
public communications. It has a range, 0.7,
uh, to 1, which is lower than what is in the public
communications. Can you just explain why they're publicly
communicating about the VCR being higher than what's in the-
Yeah. We'll, we'll come back to you on that.
I don't, I don't know the details
Okay. And I...
Yeah. I mean, I do have a bunch of really specific questions that you might not be able
to answer.
Yeah.
So, they might be for written questions.
Sure.
But like, for example, is the cost estimate that's been put out
P50, P90? What, what, what's the high end of that?
Uh, we put out as a range, which is 2.9 to 3.8, which will be a P50 to P95 range.
That is a P95?
The h- the upper end? Okay, great. Um, and
can you tell us... Um,
can you give us any information about the average time savings?
There's obviously a very attractive looking quote, "Up to 10
minutes." I mean, you could say, "Up to three hours' time savings."
I mean, it, it... You know, it's anything less than that.
It's not a very helpful number. I know it looks good if you're trying to sell the
project to the public, but it, it would be good for the public to know, what's the
average time savings? What percentage of trips would actually,
um, get the full 10-minute savings?
What's going to happen for local trips in Hataitai, um, who are trying
to access the city center, um, but have their...
are closed off now from, from the State highway?
V- V- Valid point. I think we can try and come back to you.
I, I think, th- that said, I mean, of course, it's not just travel time
improvement.
I mean, the, the benefits we'd see would be, um, reducing the travel
time variability, reduction in traffic, um-
Okay.
... and actually, you know, um,
s- substantive additional walking and cycling, um, journeys per day.
Can I then... Just one final.
Yeah. And this, um, this is... I've got this nice chart which is
using, um, Waka Kotahi data. I'll put it on here so
they can see it on screen, anyone watching at home.
Um-
Oh, cool. You brought your homework.
I'm sure it's a big crowd.
What this shows is the cost per
kilometer of State highway projects, um, going back to
2000. Uh, Waterview Tunnel obviously was, you know, much
more expensive per kilometer than any others, until you get
to the more recent runs. Um, but really, really
outstanding how East-West Link and Welly State Highway 1 City
improvements are massively more cost per
kilometer. And it seems to me this is like very relevant, right?
Because
the kilometers that you deliver-
Hmm.
... essentially speak to capacity, additional vehicle capacity.
Mm-hmm.
And so, for the amount of money you're spending, you're not really enabling that
much additional vehicle capacity relative to where you could in other parts of the
network.
Yeah.
And in both of these areas, they're in urban areas where congestion
pricing could be brought in. Now we have the legal framework for it.
As far as I know, according to a written question, congestion
pricing wasn't modeled in the base case for these investment
cases.
Let's get a, let's get a-
Will you be modeling-
... look
Will you be-
Time. ... modeling congestion charging-
Quick answer.
... in the base case? What, what will you be doing? It...
Is that within the scope of value, delivering value for
money? Or is it just you're delivering these projects as
high value for money as you can, but not looking at other value-for-money solutions
that could solve the problems of travel time varia- variability and
congestion?
Yeah. Quick, quick answer, please.
Yeah, there's a lot in that. (laughs)
Yeah. Well, look-
For sure. But-
And if you want to
make up the answer- Look, I, I-
... feel free.
W- you know that, um, it's, it's a little bit unfair to compare
Wellington and East-West Link against rural State highways-
Mm-hmm.
... on a cost per kilometer basis. You know, you've got Wellington is brownfields,
which is incredibly hard to build, and you've got two tunnels.
It's always going to cost, um, more in, in a short distance than a, than a
rural State highway, which is why Waterview was expensive as well.
Um, so that is, that is... It's, it's hard to, to compare it on that basis.
But your point being is about, um, efficiency and is it giving,
delivering value for money, and what role would pricing have in that?
We are very supportive of the new legislation of time of use.
Mm-hmm.
We absolutely think that pricing could make a massive diss-
difference around demand management, especially in Wellington.
We probably think that... Uh, I would say that we think it's not
a, a or.
It's an, it's an and. Uh, we think that we do need to do investment on the
State highway corridor to make that more efficient.
But alongside time of use and tolling, to free up the
local network, get more onto the strategic network, take traffic off the
keys, invest in public transport corridors, walking and cycling as a
system package is absolutely what we should be looking at, and we're really
supportive of considering time of use.
And, and the legislation's only just passed, so we don't have a scheme for
Wellington yet. So, yeah, we can do modeling and sensitivity testing around it, but
those schemes now have to be developed.
And, and I think Auckland's probably further ahead than Wellington, but you know,
in time, absolutely.
Okay. What we're going to do is we're going to take a break for four minutes
(laughs) and, and we'll come back and start again with
uh...
There we go. Right.
Okay. Next, next section is on, um, regulation-
Regulatory performance.
... regulatory performance, regulation of vehicles, drivers, et cetera, vehicle
inspection regime. Now, who's first up? Tangi?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Obviously, there's been a lot of media interest lately around
the integrity within the driver license system and
regime.
And I know that there's not much commentary on,
on this, but given it's a, a matter of, uh, recent-
Mm-hmm.
... sort of occurrence-
Okay.
Yeah. ... how can the community, or indeed this committee, have confidence in the
integrity when it comes to, um, drivers licensing and
in particular the transferability of perhaps international
licenses into the New Zealand system?
I mean, f- first-
So-
... just to, to be categorical,
from the board down, we've taken this incredibly
seriously. Uh, it's
concerning, um, as we've seen.
And, uh, as I say, we're taking it incredibly seriously.
I think, um,
Ben Oderson now, um,
Director of Land Transport's, um, the right person probably
to take you through the detail of it.
Thanks Simon. Yeah, so, um, NZTA takes these
issues incredibly seriously and as Director of Land Transport I have accountability
and responsibility alongside the board for these, uh, for these
matters. Uh, we, uh, I guess if I
start at the beginning, these, um, these issues
of, uh, bribery, uh, fraud,
uh, and corruption
were identified by NZTA, uh, ourselves
as part of audits, as part of our intelligence work,
uh, as part of the insights work that we do in the organization.
So, that part of the system works well in terms of
identifying these issues. Once we've identified them, we drew them to the
attention of, um, VTNZ as- as part of this,
and then worked with them as they undertook their own investigations of
their, um, driver testing offices.
We've then worked, um, once end...
Once VTNZ has, uh, uh, done that work, taken those driver
testing officers out of the system, we have worked to
test, uh, on a risked basis the people
who were, um, giving their driving tests by those driver testing
offices. And we've gone through a process of making sure that they
do, um, meet the standards for driving on the
roads. And where they don't, we have, we have, um,
removed their licenses or they will not get to keep their license.
So, um, I guess from our perspective, safety is really
important. We have moved swiftly to-
(clears throat)
... uh, deal with the issues that we've identified.
We are going through a process of testing those people, uh, and we
are removing those from the system who fail the test.
So, there must be some regulatory provision for you to be able to, to
do that in terms of the retest and, and withdrawal of a li- of a license?
That's correct. Yes, I can revoke licenses.
Okay. Um,
a- are there other activities or, um,
(clears throat) that those inspectors undertake
outside of issuing driver's licenses?
And if so, how much wider has your
investigation or sort of (...) reached into that space?
Yeah. No, these are driving testing officers who hold an O endorsement which allows
them to undertake driver licensing tests.
Okay, so they've got no other sort of-
That's correct.
... opportunities. And
what, what steps have been put in place or is it an on, I get the
sense it's an ongoing-
Yeah.
... sort of look that's
going on? It is an ongoing investigation, so there is a, a limit to the things that I can
talk about openly here.
Okay.
Uh, but we are working with VTNZ to put in place a number of arrangements.
(clears throat)
For example, with, um, they're trialing right now, uh, body
cameras on their driver testing offices, uh, within the, within the
vehicles, so that they will be able to see if there is any nefarious activity
happening, uh, while the test is being undertaken.
So, there's a number of innovations, um, that'll be put in place.
We're also, um, we have instituted a,
a joint governance meeting with, with VTNZ-
... so there's very good information sharing.
Uh, and we are doing more in terms of our own analytics and,
and, uh, intelligence work with the data that's coming through from
VTNZ.
So, uh, given the steps taken to date,
do you think that we can have confidence in the integrity of the system
as it stands today?
I think that, uh, that NZTA runs a very good system.
I think that the systems that we have in place to detect this sort of-
... behavior, uh, is very good. I think that the issues that are
being faced in the driver licensing system are reflective of wider
societal issues.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so can I sit here and say this will never happen again? No, I can't.
Do I think that we've got s- good systems in place to detect it? Yes, I do.
And when we detect it, we deal with it.
We're, we, um, go through the process of assessing whether those people are safe to
be in the system. We remove those that aren't and, uh, and
legitimately license-
(clears throat)
...
And to, and to, not to put too fine a point on that, I'm sure you've got it, but
we're, we are seeing a rise in fraud,
bribery and corruption which is testing our
systems in a way we haven't, uh, at the same
level in the past.
Yeah.
That doesn't mean we sit here and we're not-
Sure.
... confident in our systems, but, you know, it- it-
it- it is a, a strong case for vigilance.
And just one final question-
Mm-hmm.
... then is a, at a broader level, if that's your experience as
an agency that you're starting to see this-
(clears throat)
... creep in-... what sort of work programmes or work are you doing
across the agency, given that the agency has a significant role in New
Zealand in terms of licensing, approvals, you know, uh, road
user charges, all of this sort of stuff?
So what additional stuff have you sort of stepped up to try and tackle some of
these issues?
I'll just start on the, on the regulatory work.
So we, uh, have stood up an intelligence function and h- have built that up over
the last couple of years, so it is a very functional group now.
It is very well-tapped into the broader intelligence community across
government. Uh, and there is good sharing, appropriately,
between, um, agencies of, of issues.
Uh, there's very good work in, uh, police, for example.
Um,
the, the issue of fraud is, as we've said, is, is
systemic. I think there is, there will always been more we can do, uh, and we're
in the proc- we have an integrity, um, function within NZTA as well,
which sits separately to this. Um, and there are
processes where, where people can make complaints or provide information to them
under, uh, protected disclosure, disclosures or other, uh, that,
draws these atten- these matters to our attention.
Yeah.
Thank you. Um, just on that, um, so
that, uh, are there... You said you're engaging with other agencies in
terms of help dealing with this problem.
Yeah. Do you actually engage with other agencies in terms of actually understanding...
You, you started saying this is becoming, there's becoming more of this across
society. That's a very alarming, um,
comment to make. Uh, so, uh, is there engagement within, between
NZTA and other agencies who may also be saying this and then thinking about what
the patterns might be? So it's not just about dealing with
bribery, fraud, corruption in the driver testing area, but
it's something that can be targeted across the whole of New Zealand society.
Yeah, so, um, as I say, we are, we are very well-tapped in across that broader
intelligence community.
(clears throat)
Uh, and there is sharing of, of information across, um, across
agencies which, um, is common
to a number of sectors. It's probably as, as much as I can say.
Yeah. In other words, o- other agencies are seeing things which are of similar
culture, if you like, behavior, um, add to that, add them-
Similar behaviors, yes.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you for that. Right. Um, Dan, you had a question?
Uh, yes. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. (clears throat) Um, there was
reports recently around, um, warrant of fitnesses and
I think, uh, up to nearly half that were, um- Only half,
yeah. ... were, uh- Up to date. ...
overdue. Uh, of course that was from an independent provider.
(laughs) But I'm wondering if NZTA has, um, some
hard and fast facts on that and- We don't- ... what the number is?
And Brett, Brett will talk you through them, but we've got the, the actual, uh,
numbers- Yeah. ... rather than the ones reported.
Thanks. Um, and thank you, thank you for the question.
Yes, the, uh, the data that was reported was from a private
sector provider that, uh, provides app services.
Um, the numbers, the, the actual numbers are nowhere near the level that were
reported by that, um, app provider.
I find it slightly disappointing and alarming that that information in the
form that was, um, presented has, has got into the public domain.
Mm-hmm.
Um, from a p- from a, from a safety perspective, I don't think it's very
helpful to have, uh, what basically allow- amounts to
alarmist numbers in the media, because what it does-
Hm.
... is it gets people to think, "Well, if that's what's going on, if
60% of the population isn't licensed or isn't, uh,
warranting their vehicle-"
Mm-hmm.
"... then why should I do it?"
The actual data on a national basis is about a 6%
non-compliance, um- Sorry, six.
Six. Six percent?
Um, with, uh,
with licensing or, or warrants of fitness.
(clears throat) Um, so like, that's a, obviously a 94%
compliance. Mm-hmm. And in any regulatory
regime, that's, that's actually very good.
Now there are different, um, regions which have different levels of
compliance. Uh, I noted that the, um, the number
that was given for Northland was 60%, uh, by that
provider, uh, non-compliance. The actual, um, non-compliance in
Northland is 23%. So it is markedly s- um,
smaller than the 60. And the Northland fleet makes up
4.7% of the total fleet in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, I just give the committee an assurance that the numbers are now- are
nowhere near, uh, those that were reported, um, yesterday. That's great.
And will you, will NZTA be, you know, making a public
statement about this or are we relying on the two people on one that
are (laughs) - We can make a public statement. (laughs) Okay.
Great.
Um, just on, on compliance, uh, the, um,
the move to road user charges, uh, to, um...
So first part of it is, we've, um, be interested to know what, uh, the level of
compliance on RUC payment is for EVs and
PHEVs. Um, and secondly, just the whole
thing, as you said, Brett, the, um, you know, when people see large
levels of non-compliance, the, the system, systems start breaking down.
Yeah.
And so obviously if there's a tra- if there's a transition to RUC generally,
we need to have a high level of compliance.
Sure.
So what thinking have you had about that and how do we make sure that happens?
Yeah. Um, so the level of RUC compliance as it, as it pertains to
EVs and, and hybrids is more than 99%.
Uh, it's very high. Um, it came when
the, um, when the system went live for RUC on
EVs, uh, last year, we set a target of having 85%
compliance and to grow that over time.
Uh, we have achieved a, a really high level of compliance there in the, in the EV
and hybrid, um, sector.
Excellent. Yes.
Uh, in relation to the, the, um, compliance
with RUC overall, it is well into the 90%'s.
And again, any regulatory regime in the world having
a compliance rate, you know, at those sorts of levels, uh, you would
say is very successful. Brett might like to talk about the work that we're doing,
uh, in relation to chasing RUC debt, uh, and lifting that level
of compliance over time.
Yeah, I think, um, just adding to what Brent said, so overall RUC compliance
is ni- 95%. Um, and then,
um, the, the remaining part we've put a greater focus, um,
on debt, uh, revenue collection, and we've been slowly increasing that.
We're now up to, uh, revenue collection of about
76%. There's always some that has to be written off.
Uh, only a couple of years ago we were down at 66%, so we've put quite a lot more-
(coughs)
... resource into collecting, uh, the outstanding revenue which is increasing
revenue into the system, which is also good.
That's not just across RUC, by the way.
That's tolling and some of the other fees that relate to the, the, the
system.
And look, I will indulge myself and just ask one other question on that, because,
um, I know that chasing parking fines was hellishly, um, difficult
for... Sarah's laughing. Um, it's hellishly difficult for, um, for councils.
Um, just not worth the trouble of doing it sometimes.
Um, is the, uh, is the regulatory or the legislative arrangement to
allow you to actually pursue, uh, those debts,
uh-
Yeah.
... helpful? Or is it a really expensive proposition for, for
NZTA?
I'll get Serena... Introduce yourself. ... and, uh, she's-
she's in charge of this area.
(clears throat) Sorry.
Currently, I'm the, uh, chief customer and service advisor.
So I run the, um, the debt collection team as part of it,
so as indicated, um, we, we'd have a high
collection, uh, compliance, and then there is a part that is leftover
and we have a team that has
done a fantastic job of putting in new legislat- um, sorry,
new tools to be able to notify earlier of debts.
So it's making it easier to pay, and
therefore easier to comply. So that has grown, as we've
seen-
(clears throat)
... from this outstanding part of that 5%.
We're now getting closer to collecting clo- close to
76%, as mentioned.
So my, my point was, is the regulatory arrangement, um, easy so if somebody
doesn't, i- is not gonna provide...
I can see the shaking of head no, so we, we, we have an issue there in terms of the
way in which if people aren't paying it costs you so much to
go and pursue them, it becomes-
Our, our cost-
... an issue you've gotta work through, whether you do it or don't.
Well, our cost to collect is improving, but it, it is.
We have to then go and put processes in place and contact
so we then make it harder to pay. There is different processes that we wanna make
it easier to pay-
Understand that.
But it's when people don't.
When they don't, yeah.
Yeah, that's the question, and so I'm getting the impression that there is an issue
there. We will follow that one up as a-
Oh, oh, we can give, come back to you.
... written question. We'll cut, we'll do that as a written question. Okay, right.
Who else is in this, um, uh, in this area, in terms of the regulatory,
um, area? Okay, I think we're good on that one
then. Good, so we, we claw ourselves back a little bit of time. Excellent.
Right, okay, so now we're onto funding, funding and partnering with local
government, 'cause I suspect there'll be a fair bit in this area, and that includes
public transport. So who's gonna start me off with questions
before I jump one in?
Okay, you, you, way back there.
(clears throat) Thank you. Um,
I actually wanna, uh, ask about Total
Mobility, um, and
how you see that functioning at, at the moment, and
what proposed changes, if any,
are in the pipeline.
Actually looking for Lisa.
Yeah.
What actually... Huh? Is it you, Richard?
Oh, yeah.
Yes, okay. (laughs)
(laughs)
(clears throat)
Uh, so demand for that service has been going up.
Uh, subsidies were made more available over the last couple of years, uh, so demand
is much, much higher. Um, there are acknowledged challenges with
kind of clunk... Call it clunky systems.
Um, we have a project underway looking at how those systems can
be upgraded, replaced, uh, improved, so that that is much, much
easier for the public transport authorities and
ourselves to oversee that system, uh, make payments
efficiently and quickly, also to detect fraud as sort of follow-up on the
director's point on fraud. Again, there are challenges around that that we need to
be across.
But the, the pool of funding a- available, it, it's, it's been
pretty static, isn't it, historically?
Uh, I would have to get... I don't have that at my fingertips, I'm sorry.
Would have to get back to you specifically.
Okay. That, that's all right.
(clears throat)
Just generally, is, uh, Waka Kotahi looking to not
just streamline processes, but the focus there is on ease
of accessibility for end users to be able to engage
and effectively get, get the subsidies?
I know a lot of that's at the local government level.
We... Yeah, exactly. That, that is...
The actual, uh, distribution and administration of all of that is held by the,
by local government, by the PTAs. Uh, we have an interest,
absolutely, in making that as easy as possible, um, in terms of our systems and the
requirements we place, and that we support that.
Yeah, thanks.
Okay, um, I'll grab a couple of questions, then.
Um, I've just, uh, had the pleasure of, I've asked some West Coast questions.
Somebody else has got to ask some South Island questions, uh, appraising.
There's
West Coast.
Oh, excellent. Oh, very good, very good.
Um-
West Coast.
(clears throat) ... the, um, Mr. Fishman here wanted to ask about special purpose roads.
Mm-hmm.
So I don't know what the, um, I don't know what the other, original rationale is,
so I'd be interested in those, but the plan for, is for NZTA to give those back.
I don't know quite how many there are. It's probably a very small number.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but they are also by and large, as far as I'm aware, uh, councils which
have, which are under a lot of strain already.
Um, uh, I, I've already suggested to one of them they, they abandon the road if
anything goes wrong with it.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but some communities, they can't abandon them.
They've got, they, they would leave places like the West Coast or the Karaputa, for
example.
Mm-hmm.
Why are NZTA walking away from
those, given... I know you're under funding pressure.
They're under even more funding pressure.
And so what was the rationale for them in the first place?
We've stopped the ration-
And how many have we, how many have we got?
I, I mean, it's not actually a funding drop that-
Yeah.
... that's driven the, um, the-
It's catego- There's a categorization issue, isn't it?
Yeah.
So it's a network requirement. They're not required-
So-
... as state highways anymore in, in the network.
That's
right. And so that, um-
They are obviously the last lot that have still to be returned to local
government are, um, are the harder ones,
where we're dealing with, um, local government partners that have more, um,
funding pressure, um, or a l-lability to
pay. Um, we have, um, been
working with local government over a number of years around a fair way to hand
those back. Um, but there is a remaining small number of special purpose
ve-, uh, roads that are-
Yeah. Yeah. That's right. So, look, in short, we've, we, we, we came
out a few years ago to say we wanted to convert them all back to standard FAR.
A- as you know, that some, some, uh, local government and some communities
have struggled to be able to pay and get to that point.
So, the board have made concessions along the way.
Mm-hmm.
The next decision point on that will be as the next NLTP is
confirmed and how those special purpose vehicles are treated, which ha-,
uh, which hasn't-
Roads.
Roads, sorry. Not vehicles.
That's TG. Uh, the, uh, which the board hasn't made that
decision.
Um, so just in terms of, um, making that
sound- doesn't sound like it's a funding decision from what you're just saying, but
it's more, it's a, we actually don't have a w- with a non-state highway, they're
not following the state highway. So, the question, the obvious question is-
Yeah.
... um, it's, can't be with beyond your capability to be able to say, "Well, look,
okay, we've got these, there's a few of them, there's not many."
Yeah.
"Um, let's just call them what they are, special purpose roads.
That's a category of its own. It's not a state highway, but it is what it is.
We're looking after it."
Yeah. But ultimately, it's an equity perspec- uh, you know, equity decision and
that the decision was made to treat them like all local roads and that
they had a standard FAR. I think we understand there's some challenges around that
which the board has made some concessions on.
That's the decision they'll have to make going into the next NLTP period about how
we treat the remaining ones that exist.
I'm gonna-
Some have converted already.
E- equity is a very interesting, um-
Funding equity, I'm not talking.
Yeah. Well, 'cause it's very interesting, um, comment.
We don't have equity already. You can see that in the funding arrangement.
I mean, I, I wanna be careful more to say that I, but I, I take your point and
there is some pragmatism on these things.
Um,
some would say I'm an old softy on some of this.
So I- Keep being an old softy.
(laughs) ... I take your point.
Keep being an old softy. Some of those-
No, I'm not. That's right. I'm b- better be cu- i- i- I'm not saying that too
loudly. We... Yeah.
It's just out loud. (laughs)
Okay.
Okay. S-
As I say, there's not many watching, it's fine.
(laughs)
Yeah, but, but, but I know who's watching. It's, how, how many of them are there?
I can't recall.
Well, we'll, w- we'll put that in writing 50%
We're getting cut back here. There's not-
I feel like it's less than 10.
Yeah. Well, I, I know it's very small. I'm trying to think of five or six.
Yeah.
Very small.
Um, second question I wanted to ask is the FAR rates, which I raised-
Mm-hmm.
... with the minister earlier and he said, "Hey, look, you know-"
"... the, there's underspending." What is going on in the local government
area that they're underspending?
I mean, often it'll be consenting issues and things of that nature.
Why are they underspend?
Mm-hmm.
And are the... And again, with the FAR rates, I mean, there's an element of
the... Uh, well, tell me what, what's the science b-
behind selecting the FAR rates, which you've given us, thank you very much, in
answer to written questions, why some are higher, why s- why some are lower.
Um, why some are more? Okay. Yeah. That's interesting.
Um, I mean, in our area, for example, Masterton's is lower, is higher
than South Wairarapa's and I kind of look at that and go, "Hmm, okay.
Why?" Um, don't understand. So, what's the science there?
Yeah. So, there's, um, there's actually a, um, a calculator on
our website that you can play around with. There's a...
(clears throat)
You, you will love it. There is a spreadsheet-
(laughs)
... um, that you can, that you can pump your, um, your numbers into to,
to figure out what the FAR rate would be.
But effectively, it's based on the size of the network,
the ability to pay, so the, the amount of, the number of, um,
rate payers in the, in that area, and, um, and
any deprivation, um, that there might be in the area.
So, we take those three things into consideration and that helps us
calculate the FAR rate.
Okay. That's useful. Yeah.
I'll, I'll look, I'll look for the calculator to see, calculator and see what I
find.
And the board has recently decided that, um, they will
be using the same calculation into the next NLTP.
However, we will be doing work on... For that's for the standard FAR.
We'll be doing work on, um, why, where we might be using
bespoke FARs, um, and looking at the special purpose roads.
Okay. Yeah.
But just to the other part of your question around, so that's the FAR piece.
The, with, with regard to underspend, which the minister did raise this morning-
Yeah. ... and got, um, quite passionate about that, mainly relates to the
local road improvement activity class.
The other activity classes, PT infrastructure, PT
services, maintenance, uh, activity classes are there or thereabouts
as, um, Sarah said earlier that we, you know, we're tracking to where we would
expect to be at this point. There is, there is some projects that,
it's a combination of projects that have been funded that, um,
are, are, are taking longer to progress so they're not drawing down
the, the, the FAR contribution. And then there's other ones that are in the NLTP
that were probable that they haven't yet put forward for the funding but had
funding, in essence, ring fenced for, um...
And so, that was the point the minister was making that there's money available and
we gonna be continuing to push local government to progress these projects through.
Yeah. So, it's not that that money will not get spent, it's that, that they don't-
We don't wanna not spend it and we would absolutely love to spend it on local
road, uh, improvements 'cause that's what it's allocated to do.
Just timing.
When we've seen an underspend in the local road improvement activity class, um,
we've recently approved an additional $87 million for local road improvements
under the low cost low risk model. So, knowing that all of those, um, a
number of the projects that we had, um, planned as probable in the NLTP
may not be progressing or their circumstances have changed, we're releasing the
funding in different ways.
Oh, okay. Yep.
Okay. Cool. Right. I'll go to Julianne.
Um, I wanted to come to the question about, um, the discount
rates, which I think fits in this section.
It's not uniquely to local government, but, um,
it was just about whether the new discount rate and evaluation period would apply
to more than just highways. Because in the written answer you gave us, um,
quotes the guidance.
Mm-hmm.
It does say-... that it can be used if it
has an expected-
(clears throat)
... life of at least 60 years, such as a new motorway or a new bridge.
Mm-hmm.
I see.
Would that not apply to a railway line?
Yes.
Yeah.
It does.
It's just on such a-
P-T-
... cycleway.
... infrastructure.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So, is the expectation that it is used-
Yes. Correct.
... for all projects?
Yes.
And so, for example, if a, you know, the Golden
Mile project had to be... is maybe gonna be re-evaluated by the
council-
Yeah, if it was being-
... would it use- ... re-evaluated. So I think we s- I think we're being pragmatic on projects that
had already gone through the funding cycle to not have to redo the evaluation.
But if it was being re-evaluated this, if it meet the criteria, then it could come
through with the new, the new BCR calculation.
Cool.
Yeah.
Okay. Um,
couple of questions that I'll, I'll ask, 'cause I don't see anybody else who wants
to leap in at the moment. Um, in terms of public transport, just be interested
in the progress that there's been on, um,
farebox recovery. So, I mean, obviously there's been change in the-
Yeah. ... funding, um-
Yeah.
... arrangements, uh, with the idea of driving up...
Well, reducing the level of subsidy for public transport.
Just wondered how that, how that is, um, traveling.
It's, it's actually been really positive.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so, as you know, I think last time I came to the committee, we were in the
process of the consultation, and you rightly, uh, asked some pretty challenging
questions about the stretch that we'd put out there for the private
share component. In the end, we, um, we did, the bo-
we, the board, did, um, reduce those targets off, based off the feedback that
local government gave us, that they were probably pushing too far.
So trying to, trying to be realistic.
Yeah. So we've got much more realistic, uh-
Good. ... realistic targets in. And look, I think,
um, it, there's ups and downs across, um, all, all PTAs but the
positive thing is that, that the majority of PTAs, especially the big
ones, have moved in the amount of private
share. Um, they haven't... Some have hit their targets.
You take, um, you take Wellington had a target of 23.9%.
They actually have, have hit it. They're at 24.1.
Uh, last year, they were at 20.5. So, that's a real positive.
Auckland-
20.5 to 24.1?
Yep. So Auckland is slightly li- lower, but you gotta remember that's a ma- a ma-
over a much, a much bigger number. So they are, they are currently at 27.1.
They were aiming for 20, 29.4. Last year they were
25.8. So they've moved as well. So the big ones are moving. It's positive.
And as you know, the, the benefit of it is it takes pressure off both the
NLTP-
Yeah.
... and off, um, off-
Rights. ... local rates.
So again-
Mm-hmm.
... I think it would be useful to have that one as a, you know,
written
one
42 recommendations from that. We've already delivered 27
of those recommendations, which includes a
changing up the management, resetting the program, reviewing the governance.
So we've made really good in-roads into delivering those
changes and resetting out the program.
And from a roll-out perspective, Christchurch has
gone, uh, we went live on the 10th of November.
We've already had a thou... over 100,000 tags and
we've seen that growth continue week on week.
It is now 20% of adult patronage using the
contactless payments, and we've had great positive feedback from
customers. Um, with that also we've seen,
um, that we will roll out that's been successful
and, and shows proof that it can work and with our vendors.
Um, in February, we will go with concessions for SuperGold and Community Services
Cards in Greater Christchurch, and we will continue to roll out
that part of the program. Once Christchurch is delivered, we'll
start and we're hoping to start in the new year with our other
regional councils, um, wiring our buses.
So, all planning to deliver
by the end of '27.
You know, another thing I'll just add, you know, um,
for the overall, uh, system if you like, um,
you know what we can see already from Christchurch is
an indication of a positive-
Mm-hmm.
... impact on that from the easier access to public
transport, um, and patronage increase.
And so, yeah, I mean that, that, that, that it's very significant project,
um, th- that, that shows that it's, it's, it's,
it's absolutely worth doing.
So, I hesitate to use somebody's well-worn slogan, but as you sort of got
wa- was sort of off track and you got it, um, what I say back on track so to speak.
Yeah.
These guys don't use it very often these days.
(laughs) (laughs)
Right.
Well, I think that's fair. It, it requires vigilance but it's a big
technical project-
It is.
... um, but I think it's fair to say it's, it's, um,
we're pleased with recent progress.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah. Good. No, that's good. Good, good news. Right.
Any-
Anything-
I'm sorry, can
I- ... anything else in this area? Okay. Away you go. Yeah.
Yeah. Um, just in terms of, you know, identifying that you're working with next,
uh, regional partners to, to roll it out.
Um, how, how has that been, uh, planned to
ensure that PT providers or councils are not upgrading
kit, for example, new bus fleets-
Mm-hmm.
... those sorts of things and then having to retrofit, um, that?
So h- how, how is that sort of aligning f- streamline
process?
We're working individually with each regional council-
(coughs) ... so there's an individual roll-out plan for each of the councils to make
sure that we look at all of the needs for that
region. So we make sure that we don't do that, we don't-
(clears throat)
Right. ... (inaudible) apart.
So, so it sounds as though that process might be driven by the council's-
Completely.
... parent or future capacity to be able to deliver on that?
We're, we're working with the council to make sure that we're looking at the
planning, so what they have now and then looking into the future around that.
Because it has, it has grown in some of the regions-
Mm-hmm. ... and we've taken that into consideration.
And each one's quite different.
Yeah.
They all have particular needs.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, well, I also mentioned with the delay in roll-out-
Correct.
... you know, good councils, LTPs and the like will have been targeted
in particular spaces.
Yeah.
Yep.
So the, so the delayed roll-out had a bigger impact, uh, in Wellington-
Mm-hmm.
... yeah, where we are, we have had to, um, support Greater Wellington extending
the SNAPPER contract to allow that roll-out to happen-
Mm-hmm.
... a bit later, which we've, we've funded.
Um, and then now we- we've got a detailed plan about how we're going to then
transition Wellington off onto, onto the Qubik system.
Mm-hmm. What sort of value is placed on that assistance for Greater
Wellington?
Um, it, it was basically the... and it was basically a year
extension of their existing contractual terms.
That was, that was what w- what was paid 'cause we, we, we thought it was
going to end at the end of, uh, 2026 and we need it to be the end of
2027 to allow that roll-out to happen.
And ensure service continuity.
But, you know, a lot of the other regions don't actually have advanced-
Yeah.
... ticketing systems-
... so that's not such an issue, so-
No.
... it's, it's, it's not such a problem.
And ECAN does have an end-of-life system and that-
Mm-hmm.
... is why we were very keen to get it in there, which we've now done and it will
be fully in there by the middle of next year.
Julianne?
Actually, my question was-
(clears throat)
... specifically about the extension of SNAPPER-
Yeah.
... so good to hear that you have helped Greater Wellington-
Mm-hmm.
... pay for that.
Yep. What we, what we haven't paid for though is they are looking at, um,
um-
Yes.
... open loop themselves using SNAPPER, uh, that's their choice.
You'd have to talk to them about that.
We're not contributing that because we're building the system which will ultimately
overtake SNAPPER.
Okay.
Cool. I don't see any other questions in that
area.
Uh, can I talk? I have-
Oh, sorry.
... questions on climate change?
We- I do in that area. It's the next bit.
It's
Okay.
So now on to climate change, uh, climate and emergency.
Uh, sorry, climate, environment, and which includes resilience.
So can I go?
Go for it. Away you go.
(laughs)
(laughs) Go for it, Julianne.
Oh, I wanted to know about the climate impact of
projects.
Yeah.
There was something that Waka Kotahi was-
Correct.
... looking into previously. I- um,
are those... is that calculation still being
undertaken-
Yeah.
... on a project by project basis?
Correct. Yeah. So every-
Where is that reported?
Uh, through the BCR, so to your question before about how that BCR's made up
so we'll come back to you on that before you ask me that, but, uh, as part of the
BCR calculation, the climate impact assessment is undertaken.
So d- does that include the carbon emissions involved
in the construction or are you just talking about emissions reductions-
I think it's just
the emissions- ... which are modeled-
Just the emissions reduction.
That's what we do (inaudible) for the carbon emissions from construction
(inaudible) - Maybe come forward, Vanessa.
I'm Vanessa Brown. I'm the acting chief of staff.
Um, but we do account for the embodied carbon emissions from the construction
as part of the carbon neutral government program, and we report annually on
what those emissions are.
So, there, you report annually, and so,
if someone wanted to look at all the different projects and what the carbon
emissions impact of building that particular project would be, that number is
available?
I think we just report the total amount.
So, it includes both our construction, our capital construction program,
um, but also our maintenance and renewal program, and the embodied emissions
in all of them.
Yeah. And it won't include it if it's not under construction, which is the member's
question, I guess.
So, how've, like, you know, if Ministry of Transport is
meant to be doing an ERP and talk about emissions
reduction, uh, but we know in the forward
pipeline of construction projects,
there's carbon emissions associated.
Will they be able to access that and will that be reported to the public as an
increase in emissions?
Uh, we'll, um, we're li- we're only reporting annually at the moment on the carbon
neutral government program. Um, we're reporting on the year that has just been, the
total amount of embodied emissions.
So, there's no future, looking at future projects and
alternatives?
We-
Uh, we do, we do have mechanisms in terms of looking at, um, resource
efficiency and trying to reduce embodied carbon in our construction projects.
So, we have a number of ways of doing that.
For example, we carry out, um, uh, kind of a greenhouse gas
footprint on our projects as well.
Um, sometimes we have mechanisms to encourage, um, lower carbon in some
areas. Uh, but in general, we're complying with our carbon neutral government
program requirements and we're, as, as Brett has alread- already said, we're
reporting or calculating the transport emissions of our
projects through the ve- vehicle em- emissions prediction model and
including that in the BCI calculation for our projects.
Does the vehicle emissions prediction model take into account induced
demand and induced development?
Um, I don't know off the top of my head.
I don't know. We can come back. I suspect it does 'cause it will be a forward
model, which will take account of that.
But let us get a correct an- uh, an accurate answer for you on
that.
Okay. Um, I have two questions in the, um, resiliency area.
Yes, Michael.
The first one of them is, again, I'm going to go back to my recent, recent, uh,
conversations with the West Coast.
Um, they were very anxious about Bailey bridges.
Um, and the, you know, um, they've got quite a number of, uh, there's been good
work done to fix or to replace a number of bridges, uh, on the West Coast.
Yeah.
There are many other fragile bridges there, which in the event of a major
event, say AF8 or something like that-
Yeah.
... um, they are concerned about th- the severing of the coast, uh,
in multiple places, potentially.
Um, they said that the NZTA apparently has a stock of Bailey bridges, but they're
all in Canterbury and they're worried about the ability to be able to get them to
the coast. So, my question to you, really, and I know there's other vulnerable
places, you know, the East Coast-
Yeah.
... being one, for example. What's your approach to actually saying, we've
got kit, which is, and it's Bailey bridges are one example, there may be other,
other examples, which is put in various places around the country-
Yeah.
... in terms of thinking about where are the best places for it to go-
Yep.
... in terms of where are events likely to happen.
So, um-
Yeah.
So, um, the Bailey, the Bailey stock has traditionally sat in two places,
in the Hawke's Bay and in Canterbury. So, that's correct.
And that's where we've held it. And that Bailey stock, uh, has been the same
stock for numerous years that we've had that Bailey
stock. Obviously, the cyclone Gabrielle put real pressure on that
Bailey stock. It didn't run out, but it did get down to a level that, um,
if we'd had another significant event, um, before we were able
to, uh, recycle some of that Bailey stock, then we might have come under some
pressure. Um, so we talked to government and we got a,
um, a Crown grant, and I can't remember exactly who it came through.
It might have been NFCO, it might, might have been somewhere else.
But anyway, we had a, we had some money set aside that allowed us to purchase
some new stock. So, we've, um, now got a much larger stock
of, uh, Bailey bridges and some new, brand new Bailey bridges
and components of Bailey bridges, uh, that have been delivered to us.
As far as the location, um, I don't know the final answer, but that team were
doing a review, uh, for that exact reason I, I suspect which is what you're
referring to, around where we place them and whether just the two locations was
suitable, we needed some other ones.
But I haven't, unless you've got it, Kevin, I haven't, uh, seen the
outcome of that review. We might have to come back to you on that one, Chair.
Yeah, look, I'd, I'd be interested in so I know with those, um, those communities,
so-
Yeah.
... and if p- potentially it's, we put, we have more than one
location on each island, that might be something that some people would be very,
very happy with.
Yep. Yeah.
Okay, cool.
We'll come back and just, I'm not 100% sure where that's got to.
No, I appreciate that. Um, the other one's sort of resilience, um, uh,
related, which again was a West Coast, um, issue, because when Kaikoura happened
there was a lot of damage obviously done by diverting traffic around through Lewis
Pass, et cetera.
Yep.
NZTA proposes to, um, reseal the Lewis Pass-
... in a manner which the, um, you're probably well aware of this-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, the approach is to close the road essentially every day for
seven weeks over-
Yep.
... summer. Now, it was gonna be this summer, now it's gonna be next summer.
The Reefton community, it'd be fair to say, are not exactly happy.
But basically they say it will completely destroy the economy of the area.
Um, you've agreed to consult, um-
Yep.
... with the community. I guess I'm, what I'm asking is, is that consultation
thinking about, and I did say to them, you know, there are efficiency gains from
you doing it in a particular way, but thinking about the benefits to
NZTA, but also the cost to the community and which is the best way-
Yep. ... of doing it. So, I'm looking for a, you know, an agreement-
Yep. ... that you, you're, you're gonna do this in a way which is real open
conversation.
Yeah. So, so you're right. So, what happened is we, we, the, the, the road in a
number of parts is at end of life. It got really damaged through, uh, the Kaikoura
closure and we did rebuild it, but it's come back to the end of its life.
It's being well used. We w- we needed to do that renewal last year
and the community said no in the approach that we were gonna take, and we said,
"Okay, we'll extend it a year." The storm events, uh, just a
few weeks ago, um, we got some pretty terse feedback, uh, from the community
about the condition of that road, which then generated the conversation-
Yeah, yeah.
... which is, well, we wanted to renew it last year and now this is the consequence
we've got. So, we have agreed that-
Yeah. ... we will sit down with the community and see if we can find a way through.
The, the, the challenge is though that it's a very narrow-...
narrow road in parts. And in some locations, it will need to be fully
closed, um, to do the work. And we just have to work our
way through that with the community in a way that we can find a balance.
Not everyone is gonna be happy in this situation.
I
agree with that. I think it's pro- probably finding a way which is slightly less unhappy, if
possible-
Yep. ... would be appreciated.
I mean, it's pro- it's probably a, a poor analogies and I should probably
just... We sh- we should just move on, but I mean it...
You know. In the end with these, do you want the, um, the, the plaster
ripped off in one go with a big ouch?
Or do you want us to do it in 28 goes?
Yeah.
Which I would argue causes more pain.
Look, so y- y- you know, pick- pick-
All I, all I say is make sure you have the conversation in an open-
Yeah.
... transparent way.
Yeah. No. We have and they, they reached out in their last storm event, um,
critically.
Thank you.
So, we've, we, we're engaging with them.
Okay. Anything else, uh, team, in the emergency and climate
areas? Um, Tracey.
Probably just, just really quickly 'cause I'd be remiss not to ask.
Obviously, the recovery framework, um, that was developed post-Gabrielle, um,
I'm assuming that different scenarios-
Yep.
... exist. Um-
You're, you're regarding around rebuild?
Yeah, yeah.
And how we look at-
So, the seismic ones versus (inaudible) like there's different scenarios
modeled into those recovery...
program, uh-
Are you're talking about the rebuild, so the standards-
Yes. ... we will buil- rebuild back to? Yeah, yeah, yep. So, that's well-trodden.
We've learned a lot from, um, Cyclone Gabrielle, a huge amount from Cyclone
Gabrielle actually.
Both in the emergency response and how we did that, but also in
the, in the rebuild. Um, and everything we rebuild back is
definitely, um, built back-
(clears throat)
... um, to a higher standard, to the latest design standards.
But we have looked at and used Gabrielle as an opportunity to think about
standardization and how do we, you know, how do we think about
assets and their longevity? If they're gonna get damaged again, do
we, do we build it in, in, in a lighter form and then make it easier to
rebuild rather than build something that's gonna last 100 years and then, and
then have the cost, so to speak? So, we- yeah, we've got a lot more work and a lot
better understanding of that now.
And I think I was meaning specifically, um, in comparison with seismic
activity, where there still may be loads of that going on at the
time. But after Gabrielle-
Yeah.
... you were able to get on, crack onto that relatively quickly.
Yes.
So, whilst earthquake activity continues for months and months
afterwards-
Oh, yeah.
... you would have plans maybe to do things a little bit differently in those
recovery?
Yeah. Um, I don't think there's anything specific.
We've got good plans around seismic.
Um, I think the bigger issue with seismic is that there were some changes to the,
to the standards across New Zealand, which did,
um, cause a problem for us because it did drive
a, a higher standard into some of our assets. We've done...
got around that by, uh, developing our bridge manual so that you can
do site-specific and do an assessment based on the asset in that
particular location and look at what the surrounding assets are, so you don't build
a asset that will survive a huge earthquake if every other asset's gonna fall
over.
It doesn't, yeah.
So, we're trying to be a lot more mature around how we, uh, how we
account for seismic activity. But obviously public safety remains the
number one priority. We don't want assets falling down.
Makes sense. Thank you.
Okay. We are done with that section. Okay.
Road safety. Who's gonna start us off on road safety?
Uh, I think we'll go Simon then Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, look, it's heartening to
hear that there's been some changes in the
thinking around temporary traffic management.
Oh, yeah.
But I gotta be honest, I haven't seen any changes
on the network, either at state highway
or a local level. Now, you might be able to point to me, uh, point out
some, in some regions where NZTA
as a road controlling authority, uh, is taking this up.
But I'm just really, really concerned,
firstly at the amount of temporary traffic management equipment out
there, cones, signs, the number of
individuals, traffic controllers who are all in harm's
way. And we know every individual who's on the road holding the
stop-go sign is in harm's way.
And I'm just wondering,
when do you think we should expect to see the benefits of some of
the changes that have been agreed with WorkSafe and, and, and with road controlling
authorities, uh, to get these cones off the road
and actually just find some much smarter, more efficient ways to do
construction and maintenance?
Yeah.
Um, look, there are changes, so I would, I would counter your, your
view on the, that there's been no changes.
And I think we need to think about it in two parts, the, the state highway network
and the local road network. Uh, when you look at the state highway network, we are
now fully, um, using the new guide for temporary traffic management, the risk-based
approach, requiring that of all of our contractors.
The big change we've made internally is that the review and approval of
those 10 Ps is no longer dispersed.
We created a centralized team to drive consistency in those 10
Ps, so that one team of people sitting together are
making sure that, that w- they're taking a risk-based approach.
It does take time — and we knew it would — to build the capability and the supply
chain to really think in the, in that way, but we are starting
to see some benefits. I suppose the most crudest measure of that is in cost.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, before we started, uh, rolling out the risk-based
approach — and these are rolled up numbers obviously — but in M&O,
basically 15, 16% of the cost was temporary traffic
management. And in, in capital projects it was 6%.
Capital less because you, you know, it's not short term, it's longer
term. In the latest quarter that we've just had, uh, capital
was 2% of the cost of, um, tr- for traffic management and M&O
was 10%.
Right.
You're not gonna get rid of all the cones.
Cones do have a place, and you know that. Um, we...
but we are seeing, um, we are seeing a reduction in cones.
The, the leftover temporary traffic management is always an ongoing issue.
We've got more audits to do to look at un-...
uh, manned sites and unused sites, and we're keeping the pressure on our
contractors there. So, we are seeing a change. We've got more to go.
Local government, I think, are taking a little bit longer.
They're a little bit more reluctant on the guide, and we're, we're working with
them to give them confidence-
All right.
... uh, from our experiences, so they can transition across.
That's really helpful. Um, but what sticks do you
hold?
Sorry?
What sticks do you hold? Because if local government aren't-
Yeah.
... actually pulling the cones out and adapting quickly-
Uh, because every, every day they're out there with all this TDM, and with
tiny work sites that they're, you know, asking contractors to live with it.
Yeah.
It's a cost that flows onto ratepayers.
It's actually a waste of taxpayer funding that goes into the taxpayer contribution.
Yeah.
So, what are the sticks?
Well, the ultimate stick is the funding stick.
We have, the board has, am I correct? Board has written to the government...
Just did it this month.
There you go. Just did it this month, to say that we are expecting that where they
have far contribution, that they will start using the guide.
So there, the ultimate stick is the funding stick.
But you know, we, we, we can use that, but we absolutely need to get
alongside them. Like, it, it, it actually is a capability, um, and
confidence thing. We've got to get people to have the capability and
confidence that they can think about things in a different way, look at the risks,
and set the traffic management accordingly.
Mm-hmm.
There is still a little bit in the industry, people are uncomfortable, so they're
still reverting to the old clocked-in because it feels safe.
And that's what we're trying to change, and it's gonna take some time.
But we're on that journey, and we will, we will support local government on that as
well.
Right. Is there any particular thing that you think the agency could do
to actually affect that culture shift?
Because it's all very well putting out a standard and getting alongside them, but
is there just... Do you need, does there need to be a referee where
a contractor can say, "Come on, this is rubbish."
(laughs)
"What are you asking me to do? It's costing you and your ratepayers money."
Yeah.
Is there a referee that contractors can go to?
Not an independent (laughs) , uh, referee, but that, that was the purpose of
creating our centralized approval process, so that we can have,
uh, a group that are well-versed in what risk-based traff-
traffic management is-
Yeah.
... and really challenge the contractors.
And they have been challenging our contr...
We have not been accepting all the TMPs that come to us, and s-
Ah, fair
... pushing them back. The other big thing is technology. You touched on that.
I'd, I, I, I'd hope that you don't come across too many people standing on
stopgos anymore on the state highway network, uh, especially for any sort of
long-term closure. We... Most of our supply chain have moved to traffic signals
now, for your exact reason.
Local roads might be slightly different, unless it's an emergency.
So, technology and looking at overseas with Australia around
different ways of, um-
Mm-hmm.
... and different, um, products is, is, is the other way to, to get a
real stick change.
L- just to clarify, I do appreciate that.
When I was asked about the referee, if I was a contractor facing a
ridiculous demand for traffic management from some local authority road controlling
organization-
Yeah.
... who can I go to-
... to say, "Hey, this is ridiculous."
Oh, they should come
"A national agency has said that you don't need to do this anymore." Whereas these
guys are being forced to,
Yeah, they should come to us.
Yeah. Should they?
Yes.
Yeah, they
Definitely.
We, we, well, well, we're not, you know, ultimately accountable for what happens on
local road, the RCA. It, you know, we have developed a guide.
We do want it to be successful. They're the same contractors that work for us.
So, if they're doing it for us, they should be doing it for the local roads.
Yeah. So, is there a hotline?
Not a hotline.
But they know, but they know how to contact us.
We've got a few of those.
No hotlines.
All right. Well, look.
Okay.
So, the next time they, they complain to me, I'll say-
Come on, send them to us.
... "You need to ring the Transport Agency-"
Yeah.
"... and tell them what you're being subjected to, and you guys will get alongside
them."
Absolutely.
They're required to provide their transition plans to us by the 26th of
December.
Okay.
They've been sent a reminder of that this month, that it needs to be
received by the 20th of December, or there will be fund- there could be funding
implications for their activities.
Excellent. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, I'll just take a s- quick supple on that, and then I got Tony.
Um, and that's just in terms of, uh, can you put a dollar number on that?
You said, uh-
Yeah.
... the drops 15 to 16% for maintenance and operations, 6% for capital, down
to 10 and two. What are the, what does that equate to in terms of dollar
terms? 'Cause th- they're, that's not insignificant.
Uh-
If, if you did that over a year.
No. So-
May- maybe we'll let you, we'll let you come back and-
Yeah. I, I've got numbers. I've got the quarter numbers.
So, um, it's, it's definitely not...
Yeah, we're talking tens of millions.
Yeah. Well, I thought it would be-
It's-
... it'd be a sizeable quarter.
It's not
insignificant. So it's, it's-
We can give you, we can give you all those numbers rather than me read them out
here, but-
No, that'd-
... they are, they are into the millions.
We'll do that.
Yeah.
That, that will be excellent. Very helpful. Tony.
Thank you. Um, as folk travel around the country, they see the, the signage
associated with road safety campaigns-
Yeah.
... um, which is good.
Uh, but there were two campaigns that you didn't m- meet your performance targets
on as an organization. One was around seatbelt use and the other-
Yep.
... was around drink driving.
Um, so
why was that?
Yeah, sure. Karen can-
Uh, yes. Um-
... jump to this. ... back again. Karen Jones, Group Junior Manager, Engagement and Partnerships.
Uh, very happy to. So, we, uh, obviously do a reporting measure.
Uh, it's, it's a rolled-up measure, so it takes into account a number of factors
from a number of road safety high-risk campaigns.
What we found with those two measures is the alcohol,
uh, dri- uh, campaign, obviously because it's such a serious societal
issue and has such an impact, it's very highly weighted in that rolled-up measure.
And we had a campaign that launched very successfully, but it had what's
called in the business a bit of a wear-out rate. It tailed off.
So, what that means is we immediately adjust our campaign and we bring back in a
measure that has higher public awareness and uptake.
So, uh, we've just seen a new, uh, um, alcohol campaign
called, um, Booze Maths Doesn't Add Up.
All of you, I'm sure, have... You're all laughing because you've all been in that
situation where you've heard someone say, "I've had a, I've had a
pie." You know, "I've had a beer, I've had a water.
Can I have another beer?" And that's booze maths.
And so, what we're encouraging people to do is say, "That doesn't add up." So,
that's launched. It's testing really well.
And so, we're confident that that measure will track back up.
Uh, the other thing we're working on at the moment is, uh, obviously a seatbelt
campaign. And what we're working there is we have a lot of regional differences
with seatbelt campaigns. And so what we're n- doing with, uh, that and
now we've done a lot of research, and people will listen to their peers.
So, uh, a couple of months ago, we did a seatbelt campaign where we pi- um,
partnered with, uh, rugby clubs in the far north.
And they, uh, have worked with us to do a lot of social and online content targeted
at young males listening to their peers, encouraging them to belt
out to survive, belt out for their communities.
And, uh, that pilot worked really well, so we'll look to again do something with
that next year.
It's good to hear that, you know, you're being, um, resilient in terms of that.
But can I just get a bit of an understanding?
I'm still not quite clear around why, why those two campaigns
failed, and I think it's probably because the success criteria, I might not be
understanding what the success criteria is.
So is it, um, like social media, impressions,
clicks?
Oh, no.
What is it?
It's, uh, it's, um, message outtake.
So it's, it's, it's the evidence based, um, behind behaviour change and
what-
Okay.
... motivates behaviour change. So it's, so it's, it's the outtake
of the s- of the messages. Like, you watch an ad, does it tell you what to do?
And we track. We have a monthly ad tracking monitor that
tracks all the awareness of our advertising and so we-
(coughs) ... adjust our campaigns and ratings accordingly.
So happy to provide more information for you about that measure-
Thank
you. ... as, if it helps.
I have two other questions in this safety area.
First one of them is, um, well, so no, actually I think we've already knocked one
of them off. The police contract.
Yep.
Just how you ascertain that's a, it's a sizeable contract.
How do you ascertain that you're getting the right, um,
response from the police? And also, not just the input side because a lot of them
used to be, um, done very much on inputs.
You know, you do how many, um, how many roadside breath tests, et cetera, et
cetera. But in the outcomes that you're getting from,
um, from the investment that's being made.
Yep, yep. So Richard can talk, but, uh, just in general terms, you're right, it's a
big contract, about 1.3 billion over three years.
We have changed it in this period from where we've been in the past, so now it's
got a performance component to it with some KPIs around targets,
which we talked about earlier, and it has money attached to that, about $6 million
a quarter, I think Richard said.
Correct.
So that is to, to drive performance against those targets.
The measures around, um, you know, the success of
that, um, you know, takes much longer around the research we do
into and constant monitoring of, uh, vehicle accidents, deaths and
serious injuries across the, across the network, which are still, um,
reducing. Um-
Mm-hmm.
But, you know, they, they do fluctuate from, from year to year, and we're
constantly doing research, um, to, to look at how, you
know, how it's performing across a whole lot of factors, and policing is just one
of those. I don't know if you want to add anything, Richard?
Uh, yes, and, look, um,
we look at the specific KPIs and what the methods are behind
them, uh, at the moment under kind of an annual review, looking to
refresh them. But generally what we're trying to do is identify what the greatest
areas of risk are. So for instance, speeding on 100 kilometer an hour
roads or speeding in 80 zones in, in, in rural areas, we're getting that
one, and then build the KPIs around that.
It's then a police decision as to precisely how they resource to that,
uh, and how they, uh, manage to that target across the police
organization.
Okay, right. So, um, so you would then look at it and say, well
look, we've got an issue with, let's say, speeding on 80 kilometer an hour roads.
Um, so you've measured that.
Mm-hmm.
You've asked the police to have a focus and make the police focus on that.
You then measure it again and measure
We then measure it again.
And so you, you're in that process now and it's, it's too early days to, to
know?
That, it's, it's, it is early days because y- you need to see a, a
minimum of a couple of years before you can kind of say-
Yeah, yeah,
no, that's fair. ... that the trend is genuinely locked in-
Yeah. ... or understood. Um, and I, what I would expect is there's a kind of a
continual gradual adjustment that as if you get
positive effect in one place, then you reallocate the resource to others.
As you go, you're also checking that you're not, uh, taking the pedal off one
area, just allowing it to-
No.
... spread
Taking this big pedal off and speeding is a good thing.
Yeah.
Um, okay, no, appreciate that. That's cool.
So you're c- you're confident and comfortable you're going to get better outcomes
from the investment in policing than-
Absolutely.
... post case - If not, we'll change it. If, if we don't-
Go on.
We have an evidence base here, so if we don't-
Okay. ... if we don't, yeah, but because we're collecting the evidence and looking at it,
if we don't, then yes, we would change.
Yeah. And look, the last question I had in the safety area is just a general one about
progress on road safety overall.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, which would be good to, you know, that's a, uh, quite an open question and-
Yeah. ... we've obviously touched on a couple of elements, but, but, you know-
I mean, I
think- ... observations on that.
I think the first point that, um, Brett's
really said that, you know, deaths and serious injuries, whilst they
do move around a bit, and you could say very recently are up slightly, the
overall trend is still definitely downward.
That's pleasing. I think what, you know, which, um,
Tanya's asked a question on in terms of those advertising cases, but what
is, what is concerning is that it's still the two or three
basic things that people should be doing, like wearing seatbelts,
not drinking, uh, that are causing the, the
fatalities. So I don't know if there was a sort of
a...
If I can add-
Yeah, yeah.
... elaborate on that as well. Um, just the overall picture, yes,
de- deaths and serious injuries are coming down, particularly since- up to about
2018, where they've come down gradually over time.
Um-
It is, it is very gradual, though, now, isn't it?
It's gradual.
Measured on a per head of population or per-
Yeah, yeah,
no, yeah. ... kilometer traveled, it's down much more substantially.
So, um, kind of reading off the graph that 2018, 2019,
deaths per 100,000, uh, population was at the sort
of seven and a half, eight mark. It's now down at the five and a half to six
mark. So on that basis, on a, on a kind of per volume basis,
actually we're about 25% lower over the last seven years.
Yeah, I just want to-
Yeah. ... ask about that. Like, um, just wondering if the reduction in the
past year, do we, do we know what the population
in VKT is-
Uh, there's always a bit of
... for, for this year?
Yeah, as... Uh, there's always a little bit of a lag as you pick those numbers
up.
Okay.
Yeah.
Um, because anecdotally, you know, um,
VK... Um, DSI seems to come down when there's a
recession, like post-GFC there was.
Um,
but usually that would be linked somewhat to VKT, you would think.
You would see that showing up in V... You'd expect that to show up in VKT.
Um, I was just wondering what,
like,
like, sp- speed is, is a big factor.
It's a bigger factor than drugs, it's a bigger factor than alcohol.
Um,
and the ITF has noted that we have a lot of roads that have
inappropriate speed limits for the conditions, like, um,
undivided windy highways, or in, um,
urban areas. Um, so I'm just... I mean, it's great if DSI is
coming down, but, uh, do we think that can be sustained?
Um,
yes, we... I mean, if we compare to, uh, overseas jurisdictions,
the main, I think the main differences are the matter of scale of the
interventions. Um, so the volume of, the proportion of
roads subject to speed cameras, uh, to safety cameras, um, the
amount of safety record fits and the extent of which that has taken place, and
identified specific risk stuff, we are simply a little bit ba- uh, behind some of
the most advanced jurisdictions on that front.
Uh, more generally, we are about to publish our annual speed monitor, and
interestingly over time what we're seeing actually is the average speed is coming
down. There will be congestion having some impacts on that, but at the same time
actually the averages are pulling down slightly, which is positive in
terms of overall compliance.
Is that average speed where speed limits have been increased?
This is our average across the entire network.
Right.
Done, Julia?
Yeah.
Uh, one other question, uh, which I actually had written down and, um, I hadn't
asked it, but you did mention safety cameras, just the, the, um, transition from
the police. So, you went, you took them over on the first of July?
Mm-hmm.
Um, so... Going?
Yeah, they're up.
So, the, the transition is going really well.
So, all the static cameras have come across to NZTA.
Uh, we've stood up the mobile camera operations, uh, both
using SUVs and trailers. And, uh, just this week, the
first of the average speed cameras went live on Matakana Road,
uh, and we'll roll out those, um, average speed cameras over the next 12
months. So, the program is going well.
And so, there's about half a dozen, I think you said, uh, somewhere I, I read, I
think, um, average speed cameras at the moment was planned.
Is that, uh-
Yeah, planned here.
... give or take? It's a few. Sorry.
There's only one live at the moment, but-
Oh, yeah.
... there's a number of planned.
But about half a dozen, I think, um-
Oh, there's about 20.
20?
20 across the top.
Okay. Right, cool. Good, good. Okay. Good to know. Right.
Nothing else on safety?
I, I got one.
Well, th- these, um, average, um, speed, um, cameras,
um, what's the, the distance? 'Cause they're
over, you know, one at one point, and then point B is...
That's right.
What, what sort of distance are we talking about?
Uh, there's a-
A wide range, from-
Very...
There's bit like, um, five Ks to 40 Ks.
Yeah, they vary significantly.
Right, okay. Yeah. And, and so for, for the long, for the long distance ones...
So, for all of them there's, um, signposting as you enter the corridor.
Uh, and for those that are longer, there are signposts along the way to, uh, remind
people that they're within the average speed corridor, and to stick to the speed-
I've got some more questions.
Is the 40K one, is that... Are we
talking quite a few in that 40-
No.
Okay.
Where, where is that one?
Uh, on, on a main highway in the South Island.
Right. Okay.
Yeah.
Thanks.
So, the- these were all chosen on the basis of, um, deaths and serious
injuries and risks.
That's the, that's the basis?
Yeah.
Okay. Um, Simon?
No.
Sorry?
No, you don't. Um, sorry, I... So, just in terms of the way that the
average speed cameras, um, work, you know.
So, I mean, safety cameras generally have a certain amount over the speed
limit, whatever. What are these, what are these gonna do?
Uh, so all of the cameras have a, a small tolerance built
in.
Yep.
Uh, and that is taken into account in the setting of what the average speed is a
len- along the length of the corridor.
So, the, the camera, uh, uses ANPR, automatic number plate
recognition, um, technology to, um, to detect the
vehicles that comes into the corridor, and to detect it coming out, and calculates
the average speed over that, over that distance.
All of the distances are, um, certified by, um, by
limits. So, there's a very complex methodology that sits behind
that.
Okay. That is safety. Organizational change, capability and
strategy, digitization, and cost savings.
Is there any questions at all? Tanya?
Um, one of the, uh, sort of
outcomes where
you meet the targets, but a comparator with the previous
year's satisfaction was a fa- well, a reduction, was in terms of
outcomes for .
Um, and there was some qualitative stuff in
your, in your report comment around what, what that was in
terms of, um, I think time spent with Maori, et cetera.
So, whilst you've got a tick for meeting the, the target,
you've still got a note in there or an annotation that indicates that there's still
a reduction there. So,
what is it that the organization might be looking to change to try and, um,
improve on, on that metric?
Yep. Yep. No, you're right. The...
Our, um, our results from engagement with Maori has
reduced. I think some of that is, um, not just related to NZTA.
I think that's a, a more broader setting, but that's not an
excuse. We're doing a number of things, uh, around our iwi engagement.
We obviously do a heck of a lot in the project space, which is really important to
us, but we're trying to be, um, a lot more strategic than that.
We've created a national advisory group to, um...
that get together, I think every quarter now, to, um, talk to
them about the development of the National Land Transport Program and
RLTPs, and get their input into, um, how we're
developing and thinking about the future strategic-
... roading and, um, transport networks, um,
alongside, um, a whole lot of stuff on individual projects and in the
maintenance and operations space as well.
So yeah, it's not where we want it to be.
Uh, definitely not, not focusing on it.
We definitely want to turn it round, um, and we're continuing to put, um,
effort into our iwi engagement.
Simon?
Very briefly. Um,
look, NZTA is about to oversee, uh, a, a very
large, uh, PPP in Northland.
Yep.
Th- there's a huge roll-ins program.
Uh, I'm really interested in capability and capacity
building within the agency.
Yep.
And I'm gonna ask you something that, that's not meant...
Um, it, it shouldn't be taken negatively, but I'm just really
interested in how many people, senior managers in your
organization, have delivered a billion
dollar or more roading project from the
contractor or delivery side as opposed to the client
side?
No.
Yeah, I take the question. You know, I can't...
Uh, we can come back on the exact, uh, details.
But I get your point, which is a broader point, which is experience counts here,
especially when you're delivering major, major projects.
So, you know, obviously I can, um...
At the, at the top, I've got a lot of experience over a number of years in this
space, but it's not just about me, and that, uh, starts then with Kevin, which is
why we recruited Kevin out of Sh- Australia who's got, made a lot of major project
experience.
Mm-hmm.
Then from there, we are definitely looking at how we can both
grow and develop our own people, but also strategically get people out
of the industry to come and work for us in senior positions that have been there,
done that. We've picked up a couple recently, I don't want to share names, but,
uh, one in particular, um, you might have actually worked with them actually in the
past, but, um, very senior person that's come to join us.
Uh, and we will continue to strategically find people where we can
to, um, embed in the business. But it's not straightforward.
NZTA working on the client side, it's not for everyone.
Often people that worked on the contractor side want to work on the contractor
side. So, um, it's not kind of something we're going to fix overnight, but we
are definitely targeting capability, both development
internally, and where we can see people and opportunities, we'll go for them,
for sure.
Excellent. It's great to hear. Thanks.
And just one organizational question from me.
One of the things I've observed over a number of years is that, that, uh,
particularly with changes in government and changes in emphasis, uh, in terms of
what gets invested in, um, NZTA has had to, uh, should we say, do a few
somersaults over the years.
(laughs)
Um, just how's the, you know, how's the team collectively going?
How do you measure that, um, in terms of, you know-
Yeah.
... people happy, not happy, that kind of thing?
Yeah. Uh, yeah, we've done a lot of somersaults over the years.
(laughs) Uh, we've just reset our strategy.
We've tried to get back to basics, be really clear on what our core functions
are, um, which we see as, um, you know, six core functions
that we, we deliver as an agency so that people can connect to
what their role is and how that delivers to the broader, um, the broader
system. Um, but, um, as far as overall engagement's
concerned, it's actually given everything that's, um, going on and
the context that's changing constantly, it, it's actually holding up incredibly
well. It sits at about 7.6 on the, on the Gallup system out of,
out of 10, which is in the top 25% of, of, um, public
sector organizations. Uh, it can always be better and there's always challenges
within, within that. But look, overall, it's a, it's a good headline.
In the detail, we're really focused on, uh, our digital
transformation. How do we get good tools for our people, improving, uh, the
digital tools that we have to drive efficiency?
We're very focused on removing bureaucracy in the business, trying to
drive simplification around processes and systems, things
that frustrate our staff and our, and our partners when they're
interacting, um, with us. And where we are doing change, and
we have had some change processes, we're trying to be very targeted around where
that change is. We're not doing big end-to-end organizational change, but
we recognize you constantly have to change to stay relevant.
And I think your point, uh, Mr. Chair, on somersaults, that's true.
Let's be explicit as a result of significant government
changes, priorities that come through the GPS and
then the other documents. But look, what I, I do think between board and
management, uh,
we think a lot about that in our stewardship role and make sure that actually
there's a very strong body of work in all of our
programs that should be enduring
across, uh, changes if you like.
Um, you know, if you take the digitization work or some of the
regulatory work, or even in the, uh, uh,
uh, you know, improvement space where, you know, you've heard
today, uh, what we're doing in public transport, for
example, uh, because we want to make sure that, you know,
we're, we're, we're working on and delivering things that will benefit
Kiwis in a way that, that isn't, um, that isn't going
to chop and change or, to use your word, somersault.
Cool. No, good to hear. Um, right. Anything else in that
area? And then-
Well, yes, in regards-
Or, or we can either go there or we've got a wrap-up section anyway ...
for any of us.
I'll go now.
So away, away you go. Yep.
Yep. Um, I know Brett was here, uh, this morning for the, the
Minister's-
You're gone. You're in doggie land. Right, isn't it?
... um, session. Uh, but Simon, you weren't.
Mm-hmm.
One of the, the concerns that has been expressed, and Julianne's already raised it,
is around the nature of information that's made available to the
community, uh, as part of sort of consultation
processes, um, or the like, and just a commitment.
Certainly, the Minister indicated a, a commitment that that was not something he
wanted to, uh, have. Um, and I
think, you know, just a- an understanding that that sort of practice needs
to change. I mean, if we look at the Manawatū Tararua
bridge replacement, a lot of that information around the tolling stuff came out
very late in the piece. A lot of it redacted.
Stupid decision in the first place. Thankfully, it didn't, doesn't come through.
But, um, just a, a willingness to accept
that community need to have all the information available.
Um, I just want to get that sort of understanding-
Yep.
... out there.
Yeah, look, I think the, the minister was very, very clear and you got that
commitment. And I'm aligned as CE and I'm sure the chair is, as, as, as chair
of the board that, you know, we want to be as, as transparent as we can.
And if we don't get it right all the time, we're up for reviewing that-
Yep.
... and looking at that and seeing how we can improve it, so.
And I just... I, I, I, I agree, and so in a way that's the, the
end of the story. I would just say, not being defensive, but, um,
y- you know, I think we, we had a discussion at the last, uh, select committee
around this, you know, reviewing the transcript prior to this.
And, uh, and the point I did make then which I, I would just make on behalf of the
staff and the agency is-
Yep.
... if you think about the number and the level of high-profile,
complex consultations we do, um, you know, whether
it's O2NL or, you know, the variable speed stuff
or, you know, twe- twenty others,
you know, I do, I do, I do think fundamentally we, we, we...
I hope that shows you we're trying to do a, quite a strong job.
And of course, um, we do, albeit, you know, we, we need to make sure we're
always, um, lifting the bar.
Well, just to add sup on that, and like, I...
With all respect, I'm sure everyone means really well, but like, for example with
the Wellington... I've, I've had a number of people reach out to me,
constituents in Ruamatai, Wellington City councilors,
Wellington regional councilors, all saying
they have not gotten sufficient information, they have not been approached
with respect to a highway project that is going to absolutely
affect the local roads and the local public transport system.
Wouldn't it-
Those are the Wellington improvements.
This is the Wellington improvements?
Then amputee to Granada, I'm having heaps of people reach out to me
saying the route has changed-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and there's a lot of disquiet about how the route has changed and what
impact that will have on both reserves, um, and-
Yep. ... on a heritage street-
Yep.
... in Petone.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, so yeah, I'm just... I mean-
Yep.
I mean, like,
the words that you're saying here, the rhetoric is not matching the reality
from elected local people, um, who are
responsible for parts of the transport network that interact with these projects.
Yeah.
And I appreciate that the organization's moving fast, but
like-
Yep.
... what?
Oh yeah, and I mean, I... Look, you know, that's... We thank you for the feedback.
I think, um, I, I just
repeat though, um, you know, I think, I think, um,
it's certainly ne- not for lack of trying. Um, I think, you know, it,
O- overall, uh, we work very hard at the consultation piece, but, you know, we take
the feedback. Yeah.
Okay. I think that is... Any other questions in
o-... Are there questions? No? I don't think there are.
Well, I still have more questions on-
Oh, oh you still have
... state highways.
No, no, we've done state highways.
Specific state highways. I feel like you went through that section, Minister-
No, we went through that section.
... because we're ahead of time here.
We went through... W- I can tell you, Julianne, that section, we actually-
(laughs) I've been watching this.
We actually, we actually gave it 50 minutes, not 40, that we'd allocated for it.
Um, and look, I-
I thought it was meant to
be flexible anyway. ... can't entirely govern exactly how it gets used.
But we're meant to go to 6:00 PM, so...
Oh, oh.
Um, look, I'm, I'm conscious, I'm conscious that, that we've already lost two
members, um, and so I think... Can we put those questions in writing?
'Cause I think that would be useful.
Of course. I will definitely be putting in writing.
(laughs)
Um, and, and then I, I think we can give everybody 20 min-
(laughs) . We've lost that first one, so.
... 20 minutes back. Uh, so I just want to say thank you.
Is there anything you lot want to say just to finish off?
N- no. Look, thank you very mu-... I mean, I think... No. I'm...
I was gonna-
I was gonna give you an obsequious compliment. Let's not do it.
(laughs)
You're very good. Thank you.
So look, thank you all very much. We, um, we...
There's a lot of pieces of information which, um, you've already volunteered to
give us. I think, uh, between Jo and Jonathan, they've, um, taken a record of
some. There will be some... Definitely be follow-up questions just to make sure
we've got all those things covered.
Um, because we, we do like to know what's going on.
We all use the transport system. We all...
Uh, all our constituents use the transport system, so we're all very engaged in
what it does. And so the role that you collectively play, uh, is really, really
important in delivering that. So, um, thank you all very much.
Thank you.
And have a great Christmas. If we don't see you-
You too.
Yeah, you too.
Thanks guys.